Circadian rhythms in multiple aspects of cellular physiology help organisms across
taxa, from unicellular cyanobacteria to multicellular animals, adapt to environmental
day–night changes (1, 2). In mammals, neurons in the hypothalamic suprachiasmatic
nucleus (SCN) show circadian rhythms in gene expression, intracellular calcium, neural
activity, and other cellular properties (3). Circadian rhythms in SCN neuronal outputs
coordinate circadian rhythms in other cells throughout the body and generate behavioral
rhythms (4). The rhythms of SCN neuronal outputs can be generated cell intrinsically
by the negative transcription/translation feedback loop of core clock genes as a
molecular clock, which then generates 24-h oscillations in a series of genes (1, 5–7).
These gene oscillations then regulate different aspects of membrane physiology, such as
the expression levels of channels for potassium, sodium, and calcium (8–12). The
mechanisms by which the molecular clockworks coordinate complex membrane physiology
to generate neural activity rhythms within individual circadian pacemakers
remain to be defined.
Calcium signaling regulates many cellular processes, such as neural excitability, neurotransmitter
release, and gene expression (13). Cytoplasmic calcium can be regulated
from extracellular calcium influx as well as from intracellular calcium stored in the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and mitochondria (14). Studies on SCN neurons in vitro
(15, 16) and recently, in vivo (17) measured circadian calcium rhythms (CCRs) in
SCN neurons. Some studies suggested that calcium rhythms were driven by neuronal
firing and voltage-gated calcium channels (15, 18), while others suggested they were
driven by intracellular stores via the ER channel ryanodine receptor (RyR) (16). These
alternative hypotheses may derive from the technical differences in the various studies,
including the details of in vitro preparations, but also, due to a lack of single-cell resolution
in the calcium measurements.
In Drosophila, circadian pacemaker neurons also show clock-driven CCRs (19). The
dynamics can be resolved across all five major pacemaker groups (the small ventral lateral
neurons [s-LNv], the large ventral lateral neurons [l-LNv], the dorsal lateral neurons
[LNd], the group #1 dorsal neurons [DN1], and the group #3 Dorsal Neurons
[DN3]), and each group exhibits distinct and sequential daily peak phases. Within
such groups, the rhythms can be measured in single identified cells (19). The multihour
phase diversity exhibited by this network requires a series of delays effected by
environmental light and by noncell-autonomous modulation mediated by different
neuropeptides (20). Precisely how neuropeptide signaling regulates calcium activity in
pacemaker neurons over long (many-hour) durations is
unknown. To begin to understand these critical mechanisms of
pacemaker modulation, we begin by addressing the cellular and
molecular basis of pacemaker calcium rhythms with physiological,
genetic, and behavioral measures.
In this study, we again used in vivo calcium imaging at
single-cell resolution, here using a high-speed light-sheet microscope
termed OCPI-2 (21); the acronym OCPI stands for
objective-coupled planar illumination. OCPI-2 represents a
fundamental technical advance because it permits sampling frequencies
to capture stacks of large tissue volumes, without
compromising photon efficiency or spatial resolution. Whereas
OCPI-1 methods permitted us to sample a whole-brain volume
once every 10 min across the 24-h day, OCPI-2 methods permit
us to sample volumetrically at rates as high as 5 Hz. Thus,
we simultaneously measured both basal calcium levels and fast
calcium fluctuations at single-cell resolution over entire 24-h
durations. We found circadian rhythmicity in both measures.
We consider the fast fluctuations to represent events closely
coupled to neuronal firing, as have previous studies conducted
in much more restricted temporal durations (i.e., not circadian)
(e.g., refs. 22–26). In all the Drosophila pacemaker neurons we
studied, these two layers of calcium rhythms shared the same
daily temporal pattern (i.e., they were cophasic). To gain
insights into the mechanism of these patterns, we exploited the
fact that in Drosophila, many calcium channels are encoded by
single genes (14), and we used genetics to study the roles of
individual channels in generating daily pacemaker calcium
rhythms. Here, we present results of experiments in which we
knocked down RNAs encoding different calcium channels
selectively in all or a subset of pacemakers. We evaluated the
impact of individual channels in setting both slow daily changes
in basal calcium levels and in fast fluctuations. Finally, we measured
PERIOD (PER) protein staining levels and behavior to
determine which channels provide feedback to the molecular
clock and which are required for normal circadian output from
the pacemaker network.
Results
The Rhythms of Slow and Fast Calcium Activity Changes
Show Similar Daily Patterns. Previously, we reported that five
major groups of circadian pacemaker neurons each exhibit daily
calcium rhythms with distinct phases (19). These results stand
in apparent contrast to descriptions of synchronous daily electrical
activity rhythms among three of these groups: s-LNv,
l-LNv, and DN1 (12, 27, 28). The electrical activity rhythms
were recorded ex vivo from different brains isolated at four to
six different time points of the day. In contrast, we measured
calcium rhythms in vivo by scanning individual flies every 10
min for 24 h. Because of the close peak phases of calcium
rhythms in s-LNv, l-LNv, and DN1 (between late night to
midmorning) (19) and because of the coarse sampling of electrophysiological
studies, it is not certain whether calcium and
electrical activity patterns are in fact distinct. To help clarify
apparent differences in results derived from the two sets of
studies, we began by performing short-term continuous in vivo
calcium imaging (1-Hz volumetric rate) on fly brains that were
exposed acutely before each imaging experiment at five different
times of day. We focused on the LNd because this group has a
phase of calcium rhythms most distinct from those of s-LNv, l-
LNv, and DN1. In addition, the daily electrophysiological
activity pattern of LNd has not previously been reported. We
found that ∼0.1-Hz calcium fluctuations peaked at around the
same ZT8 to ZT12 (ZT, Zeitgeber Time), at which time this
pacemaker group shows peak intensity in its daily calcium
rhythm (Fig. 1A and SI Appendix, Fig. S1). The time course of
“fast” (by circadian standards) calcium fluctuations in the late
day suggests they might be caused by the calcium influx that
occurs during single action potentials or bursts of them (Fig.
1A) (23, 24, 26). This result suggested that one or more LNd
pacemakers exhibit a daily rhythm in electrical neural activity
that is roughly cophasic with this pacemaker group’s slow daily
calcium rhythm.
Because the slow and fast calcium LNd rhythms are synchronous
as measured, it is formally possible that one rhythm is
downstream of the other; for example, the slow calcium rhythm
could be the consequence of a rhythm in the fast. Alternatively,
these two processes could be completely distinct. To better
understand the relationships between the two and better
describe their phases across the entire network, we performed a
series of short-term (1-min) high-frequency (5-Hz) in vivo calcium
imaging episodes at 1-h intervals using the light-sheet
microscope dual-channel Objective Coupled Planar Illumination
(OCPI-2) (21). In so doing, we tracked both slow basal
calcium level and fast calcium fluctuations in the same individual
neurons from all five major circadian pacemaker groups; we
collected these data consecutively from single brains for entire
24-h durations (Fig. 1B). To ensure minimal disruption to the
circadian clocks due to repeated optical scanning, we used cry01
flies for these experiments, which are null for the internal photosensitive
protein CRYPTOCHROME (29). On average, all
circadian neuron groups displayed slow calcium rhythms comparable
with those we previously reported (19), except for
l-LNv, which showed additional daily calcium activation peaks
right after the time of lights off and again just before lights on.
Nevertheless, all pacemaker groups displayed daily changes in
the minimal calcium level, demonstrating that their basal calcium
levels cycle with a daily rhythm (Fig. 1 C and D). We
found that within all five pacemaker groups, changes in basal
calcium levels and in fast calcium fluctuations shared similar
daily patterns; when basal calcium levels were high within a
single pacemaker group, that group also exhibited largeramplitude
fast calcium fluctuations (SI Appendix, Fig. S3).
Power spectrum analysis clearly revealed that, for individual
neurons within each pacemaker group, calcium activity at all
frequency domains increased when the basal calcium level was
high (Fig. 1E). We asked whether the change in the incidence
of high-frequency fluctuations, measured using the geneticallyencoded
calcium reporter GCaMP6s could have a technical
basis: specifically, whether it derives from a higher level of photon
shot noise due to the higher baseline intensity. In order to
normalize the effect of shot noise, we also calculated the intensity
of the calcium signal as the square root of photon number
collected from an individual region of interest (ROI). In this
analysis, we still found daily rhythms in fast calcium fluctuations
(SI Appendix, Fig. S2). These results support the hypothesis that,
in each circadian pacemaker group, fast calcium fluctuations
exhibit a daily rhythmic pattern that is cophasic with a slow daily
rhythm in basal calcium levels.
An RNAi Screen to Identify Potential Contributions of
Different Calcium Channels. The observations described above
support the conclusion that for individual pacemakers, slow
and fast calcium activities covary across the day. Yet, these
observations do not reveal whether the two rhythms are mechanistically
linked or represent independent functions. To identify
the sources for different calcium rhythms and ask about
their relatedness, we used RNA interference (RNAi) methods
to knock down different calcium channels. We performed a
limited screen for calcium channels, including three subtypes of
α1-subunits and one type of α2δ-subunits of voltage-gated calcium
channels. In addition, we tested two types of storeoperated
calcium entry, dSTIM and dOrai, and two types of
calcium channels on the ER, RyR and inositol trisphosphate
receptor (Itpr); finally, we included the sarco/endoplasmic reticulum
calcium pump (SERCA). By knocking down these genes
selectively in circadian pacemaker neurons using tim-GAL4 or
in a subset of eight pacemaker neurons that express the
pigment dispersing factor neuropeptide (PDF) using pdf-GAL4,
we first tested whether any of these genes are required for
normal circadian behavioral rhythms. We found evidence for
the involvement of three (Fig. 2 and Table 1) as indicated by
increases in the percentage of arrhythmic (AR) flies tested
under constant darkness (DD). Reduced expression of the α1T
channel, which encodes the α1-subunit for the T-type voltagegated
calcium channel, caused the strongest behavioral
arrhythmicity when driven by either pdf-GAL4 or tim-GAL4
(65 and 83%, respectively) with one of the two RNAi lines
tested (KK100082). Likewise, knockdown of expression of the
SERCA calcium pump caused strong arrhythmicity in two
different RNAi lines. Yet, knocking down SERCA with the
stronger RNAi line in all circadian pacemakers by tim-GAL4
also shortened the flies’ life spans; 69% of flies died during
behavioral experiments. Knockdown of another calcium
channel on the ER membrane, Itpr, also affected the circadian
rhythm in behavior when driven by tim-GAL4. These
behavioral deficits suggested that α1T, SERCA, and ITPR
might be involved in the regulation of calcium rhythms in
circadian pacemaker neurons.
Slow Calcium Rhythms Require inositol trisphosphate
receptor (ITPR). We then asked whether the α1T, SERCA, and
ITPR channels that regulate circadian behavior also influence
calcium rhythms. We measured GCaMP6 fluorescence during
in vivo 24-h recordings in Drosophila knockdowns in all circadian
neurons or in just the subset of PDF-positive ones (Fig.
3). Although knocking down α1T caused the strongest behavioral
deficits, the slow calcium rhythms of all pacemaker neuron
groups in these flies were similar to those in the control genotypes.
The amplitude of calcium rhythms in flies with α1T
knocked down in all pacemaker neurons showed a nonsignificant
trend of decrease to 59.3% on average (SI Appendix, Fig.
S5A), while their activity phases were still normal (Fig. 3D and
SI Appendix, Fig. S4). In contrast, when SERCA was knocked
down in PDF neurons (Fig. 3E) or in all circadian neurons
(Fig. 3F) (using the stronger RNAi line KK107371), the slow
calcium activities of these neurons were largely AR. The amplitudes
of calcium fluctuations were decreased to 37.8% on average
(SI Appendix, Fig. S3), and the coherence was lost within
groups (Rayleigh test, P > 0.2). Likewise, the calcium rhythms
were still normal when Itpr was knocked down in PDF neurons
(Fig. 3G) but became largely AR when Itpr was knocked down
in all circadian neurons (Fig. 3H). In the latter case, the coherence
of peak phase was lost within groups (Rayleigh test, P >
0.1), consistent with the behavioral phenotypes of the two
manipulations for Itpr RNAi. Together, these results implicate
SERCA and IP3R channel activities as essential for slow calcium
rhythms and suggest that the ER may be a key calcium
source for the daily fluctuations of the basal calcium levels in
circadian pacemaker neurons.
Because the slow calcium rhythms are driven by molecular
clock gene oscillations (19), we asked whether the molecular
clock controls slow calcium rhythms by regulating SERCA
and/or ITPR levels. If SERCA and Itpr are downstream of the
molecular clock, knocking down these genes would affect calcium
rhythms and behavior but not affect the molecular clock
itself. We examined PER protein levels in all five circadian
pacemaker groups at four 12-h light:12-h dark (LD) time
points, and we found that PER cycling appeared robust in Itpr
knockdown flies but was clearly diminished in SERCA knockdown
flies (Fig. 4). Therefore, in this system, only Itpr appears
to operate principally downstream of the molecular clock and is
necessary to generate daily rhythms in basal calcium levels.
Fast Calcium Fluctuations Require α1T Calcium Channels and
ITPR. Knocking down the RNA for α1T voltage-gated calcium
channels in pacemaker neurons impaired circadian rhythms in
behavior but did not affect circadian rhythmicity in basal
calcium levels within those neurons. Therefore, we next asked
whether α1T may underlie the circadian rhythm of fast calcium
fluctuations in pacemakers. To test this, we again performed
imaging across a series of short-term (2-min) high-frequency
(1-Hz) calcium measurements on the same flies for a 24-h day
with 1-h intervals (similar to Fig. 1 yet with a slightly lower
sampling rate and using flies that were wild type for cry). By
comparing control Drosophila with those with α1T knocked
down in all circadian pacemaker neurons by tim-GAL4, we
found that knocking down α1T did not affect the daily
rhythms in the basal (slow) calcium level in any pacemaker
group except for the DN1, which showed a reduction in the
day–night difference of the basal calcium level (Fig. 5 A–I and
SI Appendix, Fig. S6). These high-frequency measures of slow
basal calcium levels largely conform with those obtained with
the slow-frequency (every 10 min) recording sessions (cf Fig.
3D). However, the high-frequency recording revealed that fast
calcium fluctuations were significantly reduced in all circadian
pacemaker neurons of the α1T knockdown flies, except for
l-LNv (Fig. 5J and SI Appendix, Fig. S7). That specific pacemaker
group instead displayed higher levels of fast calcium fluctuations.
These results indicated that, at least in the majority of
circadian pacemaker neurons, α1T is required for strong daily
rhythms in fast calcium fluctuations and that the rhythm of
fast calcium fluctuations can be selectively impaired.
We then asked whether the fast calcium fluctuations are also
affected in flies with Itpr knocked down in all pacemaker neurons.
We performed the same high-frequency calcium imaging
and analysis in Itpr knockdown flies (Fig. 6 and SI Appendix,
Fig. S8) as in α1T knockdown flies. The daily variation of
pacemaker calcium was greatly reduced in Itpr knockdown flies
(Fig. 6E), which largely recapitulated previous observations
with less frequent sampling (cf Fig. 3H). In addition, fast calcium
fluctuations were significantly reduced in all circadian
pacemaker neurons of the Itpr knockdown flies (Fig. 6F and SI
Appendix, Fig. S7). These results suggested that rhythms in
basal calcium levels, regulated by ITPR, may be necessary for
rhythms in fast calcium fluctuations.
Discussion
In this study, we used in vivo 24-h high-frequency calcium
imaging and genetic screening to study the cellular biology of
daily calcium rhythms in circadian pacemaker neurons of Drosophila.
We found that the calcium rhythm is in fact a composite;
it reflects daily fluctuations in both a slow component
(basal levels) and a fast one (high-frequency fluctuations). We
interpret fast calcium fluctuations as representations of calcium
dynamics that occur as neurons fire single action potentials or
bursts of them. While it is not sufficient to resolve single action
potentials, GCaMP6-induced fluorescence is a good index of
neuronal electrical activity (e.g., refs. 24 and 26). For individual
identified pacemakers, these two calcium rhythms share the
same daily pattern, yet distinct calcium sources appear to contribute
differentially to these two rhythms. An extracellular calcium
influx, through plasma membrane calcium channels that
include the α1T subunit, is critical for the fast calcium fluctuations.
In contrast, calcium fluxes from the ER via the channel
ITPR are required for both the slow rhythms in the basal calcium
levels and the fast ones. Importantly, both channels are
essential for normal circadian behavior. Thus, the molecular
clocks may drive circadian rhythms in pacemaker neuron output
by regulating different calcium sources to generate coordinate
but distinct rhythms in its calcium activities.
CCRs are widespread across taxa (15, 30). Calcium
rhythms are required for circadian pacemaker functions in
both rodents and Drosophila (31, 32). Studies on mammalian
circadian pacemakers in the SCN are controversial
regarding the temporal relationship between the CCR and
rhythms in electrical activity, such as in spontaneous firing
rate (SFR) and in resting membrane potential (RMP).
Recordings from SCN slice cultures showed that the phases
of CCR in individual pacemakers are diverse and could be
different from the populational phase of SFR rhythms (16,
33). However, the populational SFR phase is composed of
many diverse phases of SFR rhythms on the individual cell
level (34); it is unclear whether SFR phases align with the
phases of CCR. Imaging with both voltage sensor and calcium
sensors in SCN slices, Brancaccio et al. (35) concluded
that RMP rhythms and CCR were in phase, yet
Enoki et al. (18) concluded that RMP rhythms and CCR
were in phase in the ventral SCN but that in dorsal SCN,
the CCR phase led the RMP rhythms by ∼2 h. Because the
voltage sensor signal measured from dorsal SCN may derive
from the neural processes of ventral SCN neurons, the cellular
interpretation of these results is unclear. Another
source for the inconsistency might be the culture conditions;
in fact, when SCN neurons were recorded in vivo by
photometry, the rhythms in fast calcium activity were in
phase with slow calcium rhythms (17). In general,
comparisons of population rhythms and rhythms in single
cells are not easily reconciled. Our recordings that tracked
pacemaker neurons from different identified groups in vivo
for 24 h showed that at the single cell level, slow calcium
rhythms (CCRs) were unambiguously in phase with
rhythms in fast calcium fluctuations; the latter likely
reflects rhythms in SFR (Fig. 1).
To measure the fast calcium fluctuations, we employed a
high-frequency light-sheet scanning microscope termed OCPI-
2 (21). OCPI-2 resolved limitations present in previous microscope
designs that created a bottleneck in terms of the rate at
which tissue volumes can be repeatedly scanned. Importantly,
it does so without compromising photon efficiency or spatial
resolution. Its use here was instrumental in letting us sample
the whole-brain volume at frequencies as high as 5 Hz periodically
throughout the day. As before (19), we were mindful that
the wavelength and amount of total incident light may activate
pacemaker neurons and alter molecular clocks (36). We used
cry01 flies to avoid the direct light responses of pacemaker neurons
and found that all pacemaker groups displayed slow calcium
rhythms, with patterns that were comparable with those
we previously reported (19), except for that of l-LNv (Fig. 1).
That group displayed an additional calcium peak in the early
evening and another just before lights on. Because l-LNv innervates
the optic lobes and receives large-scale visual inputs (37),
we speculate that the repeated optical scanning might anomalously
activate l-LNv in the evening via visual systems. In the
later experiments, when we reduced the illumination duration
per hour from 31.5 s (Fig. 1) (7-ms exposure time, 15 frames
per stack, 5 Hz for 1 min) to 2.4 s (Figs. 5 and 6) (1-ms exposure
time, 20 frames per stack, 1 Hz for 2 min), l-LNv did not
show the additional evening peaks; this was true even when
measured in flies wild type for cry. Shorter durations of light
exposure permit all pacemaker groups to display slow calcium
rhythms (Fig. 5A) with phases similar to those obtained with
the slow-frequency (every 10-min) recording sessions (cf Fig.
3B and ref. 19). Therefore, the concern to avoid technical artifacts
when imaging from light-sensitive pacemaker appears
especially acute in the case of l-LNv. Nevertheless, by carefully
tuning the illumination intensity for calcium imaging, we propose
that it is possible to monitor normal slow calcium rhythms
and fast calcium fluctuations from the same individual pacemaker
neurons.
The causal relationships between clock gene rhythms, calcium
rhythms, and electrical activity rhythms in the SCN remain generally
unresolved. Treating SCN slices with Tetrodotoxin (TTX, to
block Na-dependent action potentials) diminished SFR rhythms
(16), partially affected RMP rhythms and CCRs (18, 33, 38), and
slowly affected clock gene rhythms over several days (39).
Dispersed SCN cells in vitro showed a TTX-resistant CCR, suggesting
that CCR is driven by clock gene rhythms (40). Thus, the
variation in CCR sensitivity to TTX treatment might be caused
by the degree to which clock gene rhythms in vitro become progressively
dysfunctional. In Drosophila, our findings suggested that
clock gene rhythms drive two components of the CCR—both
basal calcium levels and fast calcium fluctuations—via circadian
regulation of the ER channel ITPR and membrane voltage-gated
calcium channel α1T. Both channels might then contribute to
SFR and RMP rhythms. Similarly, in SCN pacemakers, pharmacologically
blocking another ER channel RyR affected both CCR
and SFR rhythms (16), suggesting that rhythms in basal calcium
levels are regulated by calcium from ER and are required for fast
electric activity rhythms. In addition, SCN pacemakers also
showed a circadian rhythm in fast calcium activity mediated by
L-type voltage-gated calcium channels (8). Pharmacologically
blocking these membrane channels affected SFR rhythms and in
some case, affected CCR (16, 18). In our studies, manipulating a
membrane voltage-gated calcium channel in all or a subset of
pacemakers selectively affected rhythms in fast calcium fluctuations,
which likely reflected SFR rhythms and thus, impaired circadian
outputs; however, it did not significantly affect the slow
rhythms in basal calcium levels (Fig. 5). Manipulating the ER calcium
channel IP3R in all pacemakers affected rhythms in both
slow and fast calcium rhythms. Therefore, in parallel to mammalian
SCN neurons, Drosophila circadian pacemakers generate calcium
rhythms by regulating both ER and extracellular calcium
sources. Since our results suggest little or no role for the RyR
channel (Fig. 2B), the daily rhythmic regulation in fly pacemakers
likely acts on a different set of ER and cytoplasmic membrane
channels from those in mammalian pacemakers.
We also presented RNAi evidence implicating the Itpr and
Ca-alpha1T genes in pacemaker cell calcium fluxes. However,
for each, only a single RNAi proved effective in reducing rhythmic
power and increasing percentage of arrhythmicity. Corroboration
for our findings is provided by a prior report (41),
which found that the same RNAi line we used decreases Itpr
RNA levels. Likewise, we find corroboration in a prior report
by Jeong et al. (42), who described a specific Ca-alpha1T insertion
line as a protein null mutation that exhibited reduced percentage
of rhythmicity and power in DD but without a change
in circadian period or in the daily per rhythm. They concluded
that Ca-alpha1T expression does not affect the central clock
mechanism and surmised instead that it likely affects the output
of the circadian system, specifically via a requirement for the
channel to permit normal physiological activation of pacemaker
neurons. That work provides independent genetic confirmation
of our RNAi results, and its conclusions align precisely with
our own.
The RNAi knockdown experiments indicate a role for the
ER calcium channel SERCA in supporting slow calcium
rhythms in Drosophila pacemakers and behavioral rhythms.
However, SERCA knockdown also produced high rates of
lethality and among survivors, strong effects on the PER molecular
oscillation. We conclude that SERCA, which maintains the
ER cytoplasmic calcium gradient, is essential for the normal
physiology of the cells but that these additional phenotypes precluded
an assessment of its precise role in circadian rhythmicity.
In contrast to the situation with SERCA, our results support a
hypothesis that ITPR is a crucial actuator of the molecular
clock. Previous transcriptomic analysis also supports that possibility;
in circadian neurons, Itpr displays rhythmic expression,
while SERCA does not (SI Appendix, Fig. S9) (43). Knocking
down Itpr in all circadian neurons (with tim-GAL4) generally
caused stronger deficits in both behavioral rhythms and calcium
rhythms than in just the PDF-positive neurons (with pdf-
GAL4). One possibility might be that the RNAi expression
level is lower when driven by pdf-GAL4 than when driven by
tim-GAL4. However, in SI Appendix, Fig. S5A, knocking down
Itpr in all circadian neurons caused stronger deficits in the
amplitude of calcium rhythms of non–PDF-positive neurons
(LNd, DN1, and DN3) than in those of PDF-positive neurons
(s-LNv and l-LNv). Hence, a difference in the vulnerability to
IP3R disruption between PDF-negative and PDF-positive neurons
might provide an additional or alternative explanation for
why the pdf-GAL4–driven knockdown of Itpr affected neither
calcium rhythms nor behavior. We also note that the literature
provides examples, wherein a single RNAi line produces stronger
behavioral effects when coupled with pdf-Gal4 than with
tim-GAL4 (e.g., ref. 44). Such findings suggest that the final
result in such experiments will represent a mixture of GAL4
driver line strength and the differential contributions of the
UAS:Responder gene product across different positions within
an affected neural circuit.
Finally, the RNAi knockdown of the plasma membrane calcium
channel α1T indicated a role for voltage-gated T-type calcium
channels in the final rhythmic output of the pacemakers.
Consistent with a role in the presumed output pathway,
impairing the rhythm of fast calcium activity strongly affected
circadian behavior but did not affect the molecular clock (42)
or the slow calcium rhythms. T-type channels play a crucial
role in other pacemakers, such as the Sino-Atrial node of the
mammalian heart (45, 46). Their conduction in the hyperpolarized
state and closure at more depolarized potentials are central
to their role in generating bursting dynamics with periods
much longer than the membrane time constant (47). Given the
power spectrum of the fluctuations we observed, it seems possible
that α1T channels play a similar role in the fast (∼0.1-Hz)
fluctuations of Drosophila circadian neurons. Remarkably, the
expression of α1T also displays a circadian rhythm, with distinct
phases in different groups of pacemaker neurons (SI
Appendix, Fig. S9) (43). Collectively, these results suggest that
Itpr and α1T channel activity are together critical to produce
clock regulation of rhythms in both slow and fast calcium activities
of key pacemaker neurons.
Materials and Methods
Fly Stocks. Flies were reared on standard yeast-supplemented cornmeal/agar
food at room temperature. After eclosion, male flies were entrained under LD
cycles at 25 °C for at least 3 d. The tim > GCaMPS6s; cry01/01 flies were
entrained under LD for more than 6 d.
The following fly lines were previously described: tim(UAS)-GAL4 (48), pdf-
GAL4 (49), cry-LexA (20), UAS-GCaMP6s, and LexAop-GCaMP6s (24). UAS-dSTIM
and UAS-dOrai (50) were gifts from G. Hasan, National Center For Biological Sciences,
Bengaluru, India. UAS-Itpr RNAi (41) was a gift from Mark Wu, Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD. Stable lines UAS-dcr2; tim(UAS)-GAL4; UASGCaMP6s
and pdf-GAL4;UAS-dcr2;cry-LexA,LexAop-GCaMP6s were created for
RNAi screening of calcium channels. The cry-LexA line was a gift from F. Rouyer,
National Center for Scientific Research (France), Gyf, Paris, France.
RNAi lines were obtained from the Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center
(BDSC) , the Vienna Drosophila Resource Center (VDRC), and the Tokyo Stock Center:
two lines for cac (CG43368): UAS-KK101478-RNAi (VDRC 104168) and UASJF02572-
RNAi (BDSC 27244); two lines for α1T (CG15899): UAS-KK100082-RNAi
(VDRC 108827) and UAS-JF02150-RNAi (BDSC 26251); three lines for α1D
(CG4894): UAS-GD1737-RNAi (VDRC 51491), UAS-JF01848-RNAi (BDSC 25830),
and UAS-HMS00294-RNAi (BDSC 33413); two lines for α2δ (CG12295): UASKK101267-
RNAi (VDRC 18569) and UAS-JF01825-RNAi (BDSC 25807); one line
for Orai (CG11430) UAS-HMC03562-RNAi (BDSC 53333); three lines for dSTIM
(CG9126): UAS-KK102366-RNAi (VDRC 106256), UAS-GLC01785-RNAi (BDSC
51685), and UAS-JF02567-RNAi (BDSC 27263); two lines for SERCA (CG3725):
UAS-KK107371-RNAi (VDRC 107446) and UAS-JF01948-RNAi (BDSC 25928); and
three lines for RyR (CG19844): UAS-KK101716-RNAi (VDRC 109631), UASHM05130-
RNAi (BDSC 28919), and UAS-JF03381-RNAi (BDSC 29445).
In Vivo Fly Preparations and Calcium Imaging. The fly surgery followed
procedures previously described (19, 20). Flies were first anesthetized by CO2
and immobilized by inserting the neck into a narrow cut in an aluminum foil
base. A portion of the dorsoanterior cuticle on one side of the head, an antenna,
and a small part of one compound eye were then removed. For slow calcium
rhythm measurements, imaging was conducted with a custom horizontalscanning
Objective Coupled Planar Illumination microscope (51). The scanning
was done by moving the stage horizontally every 10 min for 24 h. Each scan contained
20 to 40 separate frames with a step size of 5 to 10 μm. For fast calcium
rhythm measurements, imaging was conducted with a custom high-speed OCPI-
2 microscope (21). Each scanning session involved moving the objective using a
piezo motor at 1 to 5 Hz for 1 to 2 min. The same scans were then repeated on
the same specimens every hour for 24 h. During both slow and fast imaging
modes, fresh haemolymph-like solution (HL3 saline) was continuously perfused
(0.1 to 0.2 mL/min).
Locomotor Activity Rhythm. The Trikinetics Drosophila Activity Monitor system
was used to monitor the locomotor activity rhythms of individual flies; 4- to
6-d-old male flies were monitored for 6 d under LD cycles and then, for 9 d
under DD conditions. The circadian rhythmicity and periodicity were measured
by χ2 periodograms with a 95% confidence cutoff and SNR analysis (52).
Arrhythmicity was defined by a power value (χ2 power at the best period) less
than 10, a width lower than one, and a period less than 18 h or more than
30 h.
Immunocytochemistry. The flies were entrained for 6 d under LD and dissected
at ZT0, ZT6, ZT12, and ZT18. After dissection in ice-cold, calcium-free
saline, fly brains were fixed for 15 min in 4% paraformaldehyde containing 7%
(vol/vol) picric acid in phosphate-buffered saline. Primary antibodies were rabbit
anti-PER [1:5,000; provided by M. Rosbash, Brandeis University, Waltham, MA
(53)]. Secondary antisera were Cy3-conjugated (1:1,000; Jackson Immunoresearch).
Images were taken on the Olympus FV1200 confocal microscope. PER
protein immunostaining intensity was measured in ImageJ-based Fiji (54).
Imaging Data Analysis. Calcium imaging data were acquired by custom software,
Imagine (51), and preprocessed using custom scripts in Julia 0.6 to produce
nonrigid registration, alignment, and maximal projection along the z axis.
The images were then visualized and analyzed in ImageJ-based Fiji by manually
selecting ROIs over individual cells or groups of cells and measuring the intensity
of ROIs over time. Slow calcium activity was analyzed as described previously
(19, 20). Fast calcium activity in each scanning session was analyzed similarly.
Between sequential scanning sessions, the ROIs for individual neurons were
manually corrected for position drifts. For the calcium signal of each ROI in each
session, the mean of calcium intensity (e.g., Fig. 1C) was measured. The range
of calcium transients (e.g., Fig. 1D) was measured by the average maximal calcium
intensity at each time point and by the average minimal calcium intensity
at each time point. The power spectrum (e.g., Fig. 1E) was generated by fast Fourier
transform. Then, the calcium signal was filtered by a high-pass filter (1/15
Hz), and the SD of calcium changes was measured. Calcium activity trace analysis
and statistics were performed using R 3.3.3 and Prism 8 (GraphPad).