The human nervous system is an extremely efficient, compact, fast, and reliable computing system, yet it weighs
substantially less than most computers and performs at an
incredibly greater capacity. It has the capability of performing tasks that are far beyond the abilities of any computer yet
devised. The present textbook deals mostly with the anatomy
of the central nervous system, and in case the reader wonders
why we study neuroanatomy, we should remember that it is
our central nervous system more than anything else about us
that makes us what we are, human beings.
The nervous system is subdivided, morphologically, into
two compartments, the central nervous system (CNS), the
brain and the spinal cord, and the peripheral nervous system
(PNS), which emanates from and is a physical extension of
the CNS. The PNS is composed of cranial and spinal nerve
fibers and ganglia. Functionally, the nervous system is also
subdivided into two components, the somatic nervous system, which is under the individual’s conscious control, and
the autonomic nervous system, which controls the myriad
of activities in conjunction with the voluntary nervous system. The autonomic nervous system is a tripartite organization, in that it has a sympathetic, a parasympathetic, and
an entreric component. Simply stated, the first initiates the
“flight or fight” response, the second is concerned with the
body’s vegetative activities, whereas the enteric nervous system is involved in regulating the process of digestion. It must
be understood, however, that the interplay of these three
systems maintains homeostasis. The autonomic nervous
system acts upon three cell types to perform its functions,
these are cells of glands, smooth muscle, and cardiac muscle.
Moreover, the nervous system has two other functional components, sensory and motor. The sensory component collects
information and transmits it to the CNS (and is therefore
called afferent), where the information is sorted, analyzed,
and processed. Generally speaking, the motor component
delivers the results of the analysis away from the CNS (and is
therefore called efferent) to the effector organs, i.e., muscles
and glands, resulting in a response to the stimulus.
Discussion of the topics of neuroanatomy requires that the
student be familiar with some of the specialized terminology
of the subject matter. One of the problems that students have
in studying neuroanatomy is that there is a plethora of terms
applied to the same or similar structures. It is important,
therefore, to begin the discussion of this subject matter by
listing and defining in Table 1.1 some of the terminology the
student will encounter.
of neurons (detailed in Chapter 3) but they all have similar
structures and functions. Neurons are capable of receiving,
conducting, and transmitting impulses to each other as
well as to muscle cells and cells of glands. Usually, neurons
receive information at processes known as dendrites and
transmit information along their single axon. Thus dendrites
conduct information toward the cell body, whereas axons
conduct information away from the cell body. Neurons
usually communicate with each other as well as with other
cells at synapses, where neurotransmitter substances are
released from the axon terminal of the first neuron and bind
to receptor molecules on the surface of the second neuron
(or muscle/gland cell). Neurons may also communicate
with each other via gap junctions, intercellular pores that permit the movement of small secondary messenger molecules
from the cytoplasm of one cell into the cytoplasm of the
neighboring cell, initiating a requisite response in the target
cell.
Additional cells, known as
neuroglia, constitute several
categories of non-neuronal
supporting cells. Those in
the central nervous system
are known as macroglia, ependymal cells, and microglia. The
first two are derived from cells of the neural tube, whereas
microglia are macrophages whose origins are monocyte precursors of the bone marrow.
Ependymal cells form a simple cuboidal epithelium that
lines the central canal of the spinal cord and the ventricles
of the brain. Additionally, these cells also participate in the
formation of the choroid plexus, vascular tufts of tissue that
manufacture cerebrospinal fluid. Macroglia is a collective
term for the protoplasmic astrocytes, fibrous astrocytes, and
oligodendroglia. Protoplasmic astrocytes support neurons
in the gray matter, form a subpial barrier, and envelop capillaries of the CNS. Fibrous astrocytes are located in the white
matter and appear to function in a similar fashion to protoplasmic astrocytes. Astrocytes also function in scavenging
ions and neurotransmitter substances from the extracellular
spaces. Oligodendroglia form myelin sheaths around axons
and also surround dendrites and cell bodies of neurons in
the CNS. Schwann cells are located in the PNS and they function in forming myelin around axons of the PNS. They also
envelop unmyelinated axons.
The central nervous system
is a complex, hollow tube,
whose rostral end, the brain,
is enlarged and folded in an
elaborate manner, whereas
its caudal end, the spinal cord, is a long, tubular structure
(Fig. 1.1). The brain is housed in the cranial cavity and at the
foramen magnum is continuous with the spinal cord, housed
in the vertebral canal. The dorsal surface of the spinal cord is
closer to the spinous processes of the vertebrae, whereas its
ventral surface is closer to the bodies of the vertebrae. Since
the CNS, as well as most of the body, is bilaterally symmetric,
the sagittal (midsagittal, according to some) plane bisects
it into right and left halves. Positioning toward the sagittal
plane is considered to be the medial direction and away from
the sagittal plane is the lateral direction.
The brain is subdivided
into five major regions, the
largest being the telencephalon, which is composed
of the cerebral hemispheres;
the other regions are: the diencephalon, whose component
parts are the epithalamus, thalamus, hypothalamus and subthalamus; the mesencephalon, consisting of the cerebral
peduncles (tegmentum and crus cerebri) and the tectum
(superior and inferior colliculi); the metencephalon, including the pons and cerebellum; and the myelencephalon
(medulla oblongata). Frequently the medulla oblongata,
mesencephalon, and the pons are collectively termed the
brainstem. The lumen of the CNS is a narrow slit, the central
canal, in the spinal cord, but is expanded into a system of
ventricles in the brain and is filled with cerebrospinal fluid.
Twelve pairs of cranial nerves emerge from the brain to
supply motor, sensory, and parasympathetic innervation for
the head and neck and much of the viscera of the body.
The spinal cord (Fig. 1.2) is
a cylindrical aggregate of
nervous tissue, where white
matter surrounds a central
cylinder of gray matter. The
neurons of the spinal cord
are arranged in such a fashion that those concerned with
somatic motor function are located in the ventral horn and
their axons leave via the ventral rootlets. These are accompanied by axons of the preganglionic sympathetic neurons,
located in the lateral horn of the spinal cord in the thoracic
and upper lumbar regions, and axons of preganglionic
parasympathetic neurons located in the lateral horn of the
sacral spinal cord. The dorsal horn of the spinal cord is the
location where central processes of unipolar neurons of
dorsal root ganglia enter the spinal cord via dorsal rootlets
bringing sensory information to the CNS. Interneurons
connect two neurons to each other (e.g., unipolar sensory
neurons of the dorsal root ganglia to motor neurons of the
ventral horn). Thus, interneurons have the capability of facilitating or inhibiting a motor response to a sensory stimulus.
For example, if you prick your finger the reflex response is to
pull the finger away from the offending stimulus; however, if
a health professional sticks your finger for a blood test, the
interneuron inhibits the withdrawal of the finger.
The white matter of the spinal cord is composed of ascending and descending tracts of nerve fibers that connect regions
of the CNS to one another. Ventral and dorsal rootlets at each
level of the spinal cord join each other to form the spinal
nerves that leave the spinal cord at regular intervals, indicative of its segmentation. Attached to each dorsal root is
a dorsal root ganglion, housing the soma of the unipolar
(pseudounipolar) neurons.
The nerve cell bodies of the
CNS are grouped into large
aggregates, known as gray
matter. Gray matter may be
arranged in sheaths, as in
the cerebral cortex, or as a
smaller collection of nerve cell bodies, known as a nucleus
(or occasionally, and technically incorrectly, a ganglion, e.g.,
basal ganglia). There are two major categories of neurons,
those whose axons leave the CNS and interneurons, whose
axons remain within the CNS. The first group, called principal cells by some neuroanatomists, are generally motoneurons (somatic or autonomic), whereas interneurons relay
information from one (or one group) of neurons to a second
(or second group) of neurons within the CNS (e.g., the
interneuron of a reflex arc).
White matter is composed of processes of neurons, many
of whose axons are wrapped in a myelin sheath, which in a
living individual has a white color. These axons are collected
into small bundles, known as fasciculi, or large bundles,
called funiculi. Certain larger fiber bundles are named tracts
or capsules, whereas axons that cross the midline to connect
identical structures on opposing sides are known as commissures. Axons that travel up or down the CNS and cross the
midline from one side to the other are said to decussate at the
point of crossing over.
The peripheral nervous
system is composed of cranial nerves, spinal nerves,
their associated ganglia, and
nerve fibers of the autonomic
nervous system. It must be
understood that the PNS is in
physical continuity with the CNS, in fact cell bodies of many
of the nerve fibers (axons) of the PNS are located in the CNS.
There are 12 pairs of cranial
nerves, identified both by
name as well as by Roman
numerals I through XII. All
cranial nerves, with the
exception of the vagus (CN
X), serve structures in the head and neck only. The vagus
nerve has responsibilities in the head and neck, but also
serves many of the thoracic and abdominal viscera, e.g., the
heart and alimentary tract. Those cranial nerves that have
sensory components possess sensory ganglia housing the cell
bodies of unipolar neurons whose single process bifurcates
into a central and a peripheral process. The central process of
a unipolar neuron enters the brain, whereas its peripheral
process goes to a sensory receptor. There are no synapses
occurring in these sensory ganglia.
There are 31 pairs of spinal nerves (8 cervical, 12 thoracic, 5
lumbar, 5 sacral, and 1 coccygeal), attesting to the segmentation of the spinal cord (see Fig. 1.1). The cell bodies of sensory
neurons (unipolar neurons) are located in the dorsal root
ganglia (sensory ganglia). Again, it must be remembered that
there are no synapses occurring in the dorsal root ganglia. The
single process of each neuron bifurcates and the short central
process joins other central processes to form dorsal rootlets
that enter the spinal cord. The peripheral process goes to a
sensory receptor, which, when stimulated, causes depolarization of the peripheral process; the wave of depolarization
spreads to the central process, which transmits the stimulus
either to an interneuron (in a three neuron reflex arc) or to
a motoneuron (in a two neuron reflex arc, e.g., the patellar
reflex). Although the above description is true for reflex
arcs, it must be realized that in most instances the incoming
information is transmitted to higher levels in the brain and
is processed either cognitively or subconsciously, or both,
rather than just relying on simple reflex phenomena. These
motoneurons are multipolar neurons whose cell bodies are
located in the ventral horn of the spinal cord and serve skeletal
muscle cells only. Their axons leave via the ventral rootlets that
join the dorsal rootlets to form the spinal nerve.
Each spinal nerve bifurcates to form a smaller dorsal
primary ramus and a larger ventral primary ramus. Dorsal
primary rami supply sensory and motor innervation to the
back, whereas ventral primary rami supply the lateral and
anterior portion of the trunk. Ventral rami that supply the
thorax and abdomen usually remain as separate nerves,
whereas those of the cervical and lumbosacral regions join
each other to form plexuses from which individual nerve
bundles arise to serve the head, neck, and upper and lower
extremities. Each spinal nerve receives sensory information
from the skin of the segment, or dermatome, of the body that
it serves. The entire body is mapped into a number of dermatomes; however, there are overlaps in the innervation, so
that a single dermatome is supplied by more than one spinal
nerve. Such overlaps prevent the total anesthesia of a particular dermatome if the dorsal rootlets of the spinal nerve
supplying it are damaged.
The autonomic nervous
system is a motor system,
but unlike somatic motoneurons, it does not serve
skeletal muscle cells, instead
it innervates cardiac muscle
cells, smooth muscle cells,
and secretory cells of glands. Additionally, whereas a
somatic motoneuron directly innervates its muscle cell (Fig.
1.3), in the autonomic nervous system the neuron whose cell
body is located in the CNS (preganglionic or presynaptic
neuron) synapses with a second neuron (postganglionic or
postsynaptic neuron) located in a ganglion in the PNS. It is
the axon of the postganglionic neuron that synapses with the
cardiac muscle cell, smooth muscle cell, or secretory cell of a
gland. Thus the autonomic nervous system is said to be a two
cell system, and synapses always occur within an autonomic
ganglion (Fig. 1.3). The axon of the preganglionic neuron is
myelinated and is known as the preganglionic fiber. The
axon of the postganglionic neuron is not myelinated, and is
known as the postganglionic fiber.
The autonomic nervous system is responsible for the
maintenance of homeostasis, and is composed of three
functional components: sympathetic, parasympathetic, and
enteric. The sympathetic component prepares the body for
“fight and flight,” whereas the parasympathetic prepares
the body for a vegetative state (e.g., digestion). The enteric
nervous sytem is situated completely within the wall of the
digestive tract and controls the entire process of digestion.
Although the sympathetic and parasympathetic components
of the autonomic nervous system modulate its activities, the
enteric nervous system can function quite well on its own
if the sympathetic and parasympathetic components are
severed. Cell bodies of preganglionic sympathetic neurons are
located in the lateral horn of the thoracic and upper lumbar
spinal cord (T1 to L2,3), whereas those of the preganglionic
parasympathetic neurons are located in the brain (and their
axons travel with CN III, VII, IX, and X) and the lateral horn
of the sacral spinal cord (S2–S4). Postganglionic cell bodies
of sympathetic neurons are usually located near the spinal
cord, within the sympathetic chain ganglia, or a little farther
away, in collateral ganglia. The cell bodies of postganglionic
parasympathetic neurons, however, are located in ganglia
that are in the vicinity of the viscera being innervated.
The cell bodies of the sensory neurons that supply the
viscera are located in the dorsal root ganglia of spinal nerves
or in the sensory ganglia of cranial nerves, along with
the somatic sensory neurons. However, their peripheral processes accompany the preganglionic autonomic fibers into
their respective ganglia, but do not synapse in those ganglia.
Moreover, these peripheral fibers continue to accompany the
postganglionic autonomic fibers to the same destinations. In
spite of their route, these sensory neurons are not considered
to be a part of the autonomic nervous system. Sensory information relayed by these autonomic sensory nerves are not
registered as part of the conscious experience, and even pain
sensations are experienced as “referred pain” in somatic
regions of the body (e.g., angina pectoris, where pain sensations arising in the heart muscle are experienced as pressure
in the chest, back, and arm (regions served by the same segmental spinal nerve)).
Embryogenesis, the development of the future individual,
begins with the fusion of the male and female gametes, the
spermatozoon and the oocyte, respectively. This occurs in the
fallopian tube (oviduct). The process of fusion is known as
fertilization, subsequent to which the fertilized ovum is referred to as a zygote, the very beginning of a new individual
(Fig. 2.1). The mitotic activity of the zygote is responsible
for the increase in the number of cells that will be required for
the construction of the future individual as well as for the
embryonic component of the supporting structures that will
ensure the requisite nourishment for normal development
and growth of the future embryo.
The normal development of the embryo is divided into a
number of stages and the interested reader is referred to a
textbook of human embryology. In the present textbook,
human embryology is presented from the perspective of
neuroanatomy and only those aspects of human development are presented that will assist the student in appreciating
the complexity and beauty of how the nervous system progresses from an ill-defined cluster of cells to an amazingly
intricate functional unit. In order for the reader to be able to
grasp the manner in which this process occurs, it is advisable
to show not only the development of the nervous system per
se, but also that of the structures that envelop and surround
the nervous system. Therefore, this chapter includes a
description of early embryology, the development of the
pharyngeal arches, formation of the face, and some of the
molecular events that appear to govern this entire process.
The zygote undergoes a
series of mitotic divisions,
known as cleavage, which
will result in the formation of
a solid cluster of cells, where
each cell is smaller than the
original zygote. This cluster of cells resembles a mulberry,
and hence is known as the morula. The cells of the morula
secrete a viscous fluid that creates a central cavity by pushing
the cells to the periphery until a hollow ball of cells is formed,
known as the blastocyst (Fig. 2.1).
Although most of the cells of the blastocyst are at the
periphery, a few of the cells are trapped inside, adhering to
one of the poles of this hollow ball of cells. These trapped cells
are the embryoblasts (inner cell mass), whereas the peripherally positioned cells are the trophoblasts.
The embryoblasts will give rise to the embryo whereas
the trophoblasts are responsible for the formation of the embryonic portion of the placenta.
The cells of embryoblasts
rearrange themselves to form
two layers, the epiblasts
and the hypoblasts, and the
embryo becomes known as the bilaminar germ disc. The
epiblast is closer to the trophoblast cells than is the hypoblast,
and the forming embryo is about 7–8 days old (Fig. 2.1). By
this time it has reached the uterine cavity, where it burrows
into the wall of the uterus. This process of implantation
begins on the late sixth or early seventh day after fertilization
and is completed on the eleventh day.
During the period of implantation some of the cells of the
epiblast delaminate, forming a membrane over the remaining epiblast. This new layer of cells is composed of the
amnioblasts, which will give rise to the amniotic sac, and the
space between the amnioblasts and the epiblasts is known as
the amniotic cavity.
At about the fourteenth day
post fertilization, at the anterior end of the bilaminar
germ disc, a few cells of the
epiblasts form desmosomal
contacts with a few cells of the underlying hypoblast, thus
forming the prochordal plate, which will be the future
buccopharyngeal membrane. Approximately 1 day later a
longitudinal furrow, the primitive groove, develops in the
epiblast on the posterior aspect of the bilaminar germ disc,
the anteriormost extent of which is deeper, and is referred to
as the primitive pit. Bordering both sides of the primitive
groove is an elevation of cells, the primitive streak, whereas
the anterior border of the primitive pit is a small elevation of
cells, the primitive node (Hensen’s node).
Cells of the epiblast undergo active mitosis along most of its
surface and the newly formed cells migrate to the primitive
streak. Here they enter the primitive groove and pass into the
space between the epiblasts and the hypoblast, thus forming
a new, intermediate layer of cells, the mesoderm. Some of
these cells do not stop in the mesoderm space, but displace
most of the original cells of the hypoblast, pushing the original cells of the hypoblast laterally. The cells of the hypoblast
become incorporated into an extraembryonic region, known
as the yolk sac. As this process is occurring, the epiblast is
renamed the ectoderm and the new cell layer that replaces
the hypoblasts is referred to as the endoderm. Thus, as a
result of the conversion of the embryoblast of the blastocyst
into the trilaminar germ disc, a process known as gastrulation, the embryo is composed of three layers (ectoderm,
mesoderm, and endoderm), and is known as the trilaminar
germ disc (Fig. 2.1). The entire embryo, at this time, is
approximately 1 mm in length.
Cells of the mesoderm cannot penetrate the contact of the
ectoderm and endoderm at the prochordal plate, but they can
migrate around this region of adhesion, and some mesoderm
cells will be located anterior to this structure. These cells
are cardiogenic cells, and begin to form the future heart.
An additional group of cells migrate from the primitive
node into the primitive pit and proceed anteriorly, en masse,
between the ectoderm and the endoderm until they reach
the prochordal plate, where their progress is blocked. This
pencil-shaped column of cells is known as the notochordal
process, and it possesses special inductive capabilities. The
notochord induces the cells of the ectoderm lying above it to
proliferate and form the flat neural plate, the beginning of the
primitive nervous system of the embryo.
Since, at this time the primitive nervous system is on the
external aspect of the body,
it has to be internalized. The
process of internalization, known as neurulation, is accomplished by an alteration in cell shape and by increased mitotic
activity, especially of the lateral edges of the neural plate.
These activities begin to fold the neural plate into a longitudinal furrow, the neural groove, whose two walls are the
neural folds. Further cell division and continued change in
cell morphology cause the neural folds of the two sides to
approximate and fuse with each other in the midline, forming
the neural tube (Fig. 2.2). The process of fusion starts at the
midcervical level and proceeds anteriorly (rostrally) and posteriorly (caudally) and is completed by the end of the fourth
week of gestation. The final regions of the neural tube to be
closed are the anterior and posterior neuropores. The cells
of the neural tube just above the notochord differentiate to
form the floor plate. These cells induce the differentiation of
neuroblasts into motoneurons and establish the polarity of
the neural tube
Fusion of the lateral edges of the right and left sides of
the central nervous system (CNS) is accompanied by fusion
of the ectoderm, whose edges became approximated during
neural tube formation. The simultaneous fusions permit a
separation of the neural tube from the overlying ectoderm,
and complete internalization of the nervous system. Incomplete fusion results in a relatively common developmental
anomaly known as spina bifida. The nervous system, including the organs of special senses, originate from three sources:
the neural tube (CNS, somatic motoneurons, and preganglionic autonomic neurons); the neural crest (see below); and
the ectodermal placodes (lens of the eye, inner ear, pituitary
gland, and contribution to the formation of somatic sensory
ganglia of the cranial nerves).
As the edges of the neural
folds meet each other, some
of their cells do not participate in the formation of the
neural tube, instead they form a narrow strip of cells, the
neural crest (Fig. 2.2). The cells of the neural crest will
migrate throughout the body to form almost the entire
peripheral nervous system, including the enteric nervous
system, dorsal root ganglia, sensory ganglia of the cranial
nerves, all postganglionic autonomic neurons, as well as
melanocytes, parenchymal cells of the suprarenal medulla
(chromaffin and ganglion cells), Schwann cells and satellite
cells of the peripheral nervous system, and most of the mesenchymal cells of the head and anterior neck. Therefore, most
of the mesenchymal cells of this region are not derived from
mesoderm, instead they are neuroectodermal in origin and
are referred to as ectomesenchyme. Derivatives of the neural
crest, neural plate, and ectodermal placodes are summarized
in Table 2.1. The cells of the neural crest follow four general
pathways marked by signaling molecules manufactured and
released by neighboring cells. Examples of these molecules
are retinoic acid, transforming growth factor, and fibroblast
growth factor. These signaling molecules contact cell surface
receptors of target cells, activating intracellular molecular
systems that cause specific responses within those cells.
Some of these responses activate cytoplasmic enzyme
systems, whereas other responses include the activation of
transcription factors that regulate specific gene expressions,
each resulting in the activation of specific inductive processes
necessary for the formation of the nervous system.
The mesoderm lying lateral
to the neural tube and notochord in the region of the
future trunk is known as the
paraxial mesoderm, and it
becomes segmented into paired blocks of tissue, known as
somites (Fig. 2.3). Each somite is composed of three elements.
These are the sclerotome, responsible for the formation of
two succeeding vertebrae and their intervening intervertebral disc; myotome, responsible for the formation of the
muscle masses associated with that segment of the trunk;
and dermatome, responsible for the formation of the dermis
of the skin in its particular area of the trunk.
The region of the paraxial mesoderm lateral to the somites
is known as the intermediate mesoderm and it forms the
urogenital system. The most lateral aspect of the paraxial
mesoderm, known as the lateral plate mesoderm, splits into
wo sheaths and the intervening space between these two
sheaths is known as the coelom, or body cavity (Fig. 2.3). The
dorsal of the two sheaths of the lateral plate mesoderm
becomes known as the somatic mesoderm, and together with
its associated ectoderm this is referred to as the somatopleure.
The ventral sheath is known as the splanchnic mesoderm
and, together with its associated endoderm, is referred to as
the splanchnopleure. The somatopleure gives rise to the
body wall whereas the splanchnopleure forms the wall of the
gut. The coelom becomes subdivided into the peritoneal,
pleural, and pericardial cavities.
Segmentation of the paraxial mesoderm of the head is
incomplete and, instead of forming somites, it is said to form
about 18–20 pairs of somitomeres, somite-like structures
that are responsible for the formation of the muscles of the
head. The anteriormost seven pairs of somitomeres remain as
unsegmented structures, whereas the posterior somitomeres
become transformed into somites.
As the neural tube becomes
internalized, its anterior
region, the future brain—
whose development is
detailed below—is developing so rapidly that it grows
above and anterior to the prochordal plate, it overlies the cardiogenic region, and approximates the amniotic sac. The
anterior end of the embryo, possibly to provide more room
for growth, begins to bend in an inferior direction (cephalic
flexure). As that occurs, the future heart becomes neatly
tucked beneath the embryo, and the prochordal plate, now
referred to as the buccopharyngeal membrane, becomes
positioned superiorly to the developing heart, separating the
stomadeum, the primitive oral cavity, from the developing
foregut (pharynx). Note that the stomadeum is in fact a space
captured by the embryo from the amniotic cavity. The formation of the stomadeum is indicative of the initiation of the
development of the face.
As the buccopharyngeal membrane degenerates during
the fifth week of development and communication is established between the future oral cavity and the pharynx, the
stomadeum deepens and begins to be surrounded by
ectodermal-covered mesenchymal thickenings, the pharyngeal
arches (previously named branchial arches). These bilaterally
positioned arches develop in an anteroposterior direction.
The first arch is the mandibular arch, the second is the hyoid
arch, whereas successive arches are numbered 3, 4, and 6,
with the notable absence of the fifth pharyngeal arch, which
in humans is rudimentary. Between neighboring arches an
external depression—the ectodermally lined pharyngeal
groove—is encountered, with its anatomical counterpart
on the inside, the pharyngeal pouch, an evagination of the
endodermally lined pharynx.
The connective tissue elements of the pharyngeal arches,
especially those associated with the developing musculature,
arise from somitomere mesoderm, whereas the majority of
the mesenchyme, particularly in the anterior regions of the
arches, arise from neural crest material. These neural crestderived cells arise from the midbrain and the rhombomeres
and, during early pharyngeal arch formation, express homeobox gene products (Hoxb genes) that reflect their sites of
neural origin.
Each pharyngeal arch possesses its own cartilage,
nerve, vascular, and muscular components. The first
two arches become developed to the greatest extent, whereas the last one is the most
poorly developed. Only some of their derivatives will be
discussed.
The cartilage of the first (mandibular) arch is a horseshoeshaped structure, known as Meckel’s cartilage. Most of
this cartilage will disappear, except for its anteriormost
extent which participates in the formation of the mental symphysis and its posteriormost extent which gives rise to the
malleus and incus, two of the three ossicles of the ear. The
perichondrium of Meckel’s cartilage becomes the sphenomandibular ligament and the anterior ligament of the
malleus.
The ectomesenchyme of the first pharyngeal arch forms
the muscles of mastication (temporalis, masseter, and lateral
and medial pterygoid muscles), as well as the following muscles: the tensor veli palatini, tensor tympani, anterior belly of
the digastric, and mylohyoid. Since these muscles are derived
from the mandibular arch, they are innervated by the nerve
of this arch, the trigeminal nerve (CN V). The mandibular
arch, as will be evident later in this chapter, is responsible for
the formation of much of the face.
The development of the mandibular arch is dependent on
the presence of the epidermally derived signaling molecule,
endothelin-1 (ET-1). This molecule probably functions in the
facilitation of the interaction between the ectomesenchymal
cells and the epithelial components of the arch, a process
necessary for the development of structures that originate in
the mandibular arch.
The cartilage of the second or hyoid arch is known as
Reichert’s cartilage. Most of this cartilage will also disappear, but parts of it will be responsible for the formation of the stapes, the third ossicle of the ear, as well as the
styloid process, and the lesser cornu and superior aspect of
the body of the hyoid bone. Additionally, the stylohyoid
ligament is derived from the perichondrium of Reichert’s
cartilage.
The muscles of facial expression take their origin in the
hyoid arch mesoderm, along with the stapedius, stylohyoid,
and the posterior belly of the digastric muscles. All of the
above muscles are, therefore, innervated by the nerve of the
second arch, the facial nerve (CN VII).
The homeobox gene Hoxa-2 is responsible for the normal
development of the hyoid arch and its derivatives. In the
absence of Hoxa-2 the formation of second arch derivatives
does not occur, instead first arch derivatives develop in the
hyoid arch. The implication of this switch is that mandibular
arch substances form by default and Hoxa-2 gene products
prevent the default condition from taking place.
The cartilage of the third arch is unnamed, but it is responsible for the formation of the greater horn and the inferior half
of the body of the hyoid bone. The only muscle to be derived
from the mesoderm of the third arch is the stylopharyngeus
muscle, innervated by the glossopharyngeal nerve (CN IX),
the nerve of the third arch.
The cartilages of the fourth and sixth pharyngeal arches are
also unnamed. They participate in the formation of the skeleton of the larynx. It is believed that the muscles associated
with the larynx and pharynx are derived from the mesenchyme of these arches. The innervation of these muscles is
somewhat confusing, for they receive their nerve supply
from the pharyngeal plexus (composed of fibers from CN IX,
X, and XI). The nerves of the fourth and sixth arches, however, are the superior laryngeal and recurrent laryngeal
branches of the vagus nerve (CN X), respectively.
Only the first pharyngeal
groove, that between the
mandibular and hyoid
arches, gives rise to a
definitive structure. This
groove becomes deeper and
approximates the first pharyngeal pouch, so much so, that only a thin membrane, the
pharyngeal membrane (closing plate), separates the groove
from the pouch. This closing plate becomes the tympanic
membrane whose external surface is covered by the ectodermal derivative of the first pharyngeal groove. The remainder
of the first pharyngeal groove becomes the external auditory
canal.
The subsequent pharyngeal grooves are submerged by the
sudden spurt of growth experienced by the second pharyngeal arch, which grows in an inferior direction, to form
the future neck. Occasionally, the submerged pharyngeal
grooves do not become obliterated, and thus remain as cervical sinuses, which may result in the formation of cervical
cysts.
The message for this sudden growth spurt arises from the
epithelium covering the tip of the second arch. These ectodermal cells express BMP-7, sonic hedgehog, and fibroblast
growth factor 8, which are responsible for the proliferation of
the mesenchymal cells of the hyoid arch.
The first pharyngeal pouch,
lying between the mandibular and hyoid arches, forms
the Eustachian tube, the tympanic cavity, and the endodermal lining of the eardrum.
The second pharyngeal pouch forms the palatine tonsils. The
third pharyngeal pouch gives rise to the thymus and the
inferior parathyroid glands. The fourth pharyngeal pouch
forms the superior parathyroid gland, and perhaps part of
the thymus, and the fifth pharyngeal pouch gives rise to the
parafollicular cells of the thyroid gland.
Development of the embryo
requires a blueprint of spatial phenomena that occur
at specific, predetermined
periods of time, a process referred to as patterning. This
blueprint is located in the nucleus of each cell, present in the
chromosomes as a group of related genes. Various intra- and
extracellular parameters cause the activation or suppression of these genes and in this fashion facilitate the normal
sequence of growth and development.
Genes code for the synthesis of specific proteins, many of
which are enzymes that are responsible for the occurrence of
specific events. Certain genes have been conserved through
evolution and their study in lower organisms, such as the
fruitfly, has provided information that is directly applicable
to the developmental processes of higher organisms, including humans. A family of genes, known as the homeobox
genes, code for the synthesis of transcription factors,
proteins that bind to and regulate the expression of other
genes.
The time sequence of the events controlled by products of
these homeobox genes and by growth factors are essential for
normal development because certain genes can be switched
on only if some other genes have already been activated and
if still other genes have not as yet been switched on. In other
words, there are “windows of opportunity” for the occurrence of certain events and if that timeframe is missed then
development will not proceed normally. Therefore, these
homeobox genes become activated in a specific order, and
their sequential expression establishes a pattern of developmental events. In order for development to progress in a
normal manner, cells must interact with each other. These
interactions may involve the physical contact of two cells or
the release of a particular substance by one cell, referred to
as the signaling cell, to act as a message for the other cell,
known as the target cell.
The substance that is released is known by various names,
such as signaling molecule, growth factor, or ligand, and it
reaches its target cell by traveling in the body fluids. Since
the signaling molecule may meet a number of other cells, it
is important that only the target cells become influenced
by that particular molecule and this process is ensured by
the presence of receptor molecules on the surfaces of cells.
Usually, a specific receptor molecule recognizes only a particular signaling molecule. This is similar to a lock and key concept, where a specific lock can be opened only by a particular
key.
If physical contact between cells is required, it is important
that the two cells recognize each other. Cell recognition is also
a function of a series of cell surface receptor molecules, some
of which act as the keys and the others as locks. Usually several molecules are involved on each cell so as to ensure that
only the intended target cell is influenced by the signaling cell.
Once the cell surface receptors come into contact with and
bind the signaling molecule, or come into contact with the
molecules on the signaling cell’s surface, a sequence of intracellular events is initiated resulting in the regulation of a
single gene or a series of genes of the target cell. The expression of these genes may cause the release of further signaling
molecules, may alter the activities of the target cell, may
prompt the target cell to differentiate into another cell type,
may compel the cell to proliferate, or may direct the cell to
undergo apoptosis and die. Each of these events is necessary
for normal development to occur. The process whereby one
cell causes its target cell to differentiate, that is become transformed into a different cell type, is known as induction.
It is interesting to note that the number of growth factors
that regulate development are relatively small. The reason for
the paucity of their number is that they act in combination
with each other, and by simple permutations and combinations of just a few of these factors a tremendous number of
signals may be generated.
Initially, the neural tube is
composed of a single layer
of columnar cells, known
as neuroepithelial cells.
Proliferation of these cells
results in a thickened tubular structure whose cephalic
region begins to form three enlargements: the prosencephalon (forebrain), mesencephalon (midbrain), and
rhombencephalon (hindbrain). The caudal extent of the
neural tube forms the spinal cord. As the three vesicles are
developing, the cephalic flexure in the region of the mesencephalon and the cervical flexure, between the rhombencephalon and the future spinal cord, are also forming.
By the fifth week of gestation the prosencephalon is
divided into two regions: the telencephalon with its two
lateral swellings, the future cerebral hemispheres, and the
diencephalon, whose optic vesicles are in the process of
development. The rhombencephalon is also subdivided, by
the pontine flexure, into two regions: the metencephalon,
which will form the pons and the cerebellum, and the myelencephalon, which will develop into the medulla oblongata.
These flexures provide increased space for the folding and
three-dimensional organization of the brain.
The lumen of the developing CNS is subdivided into the
ventricles of the brain and the central canal of the spinal cord.
The lateral ventricles of the cerebral hemispheres communicate with the third ventricle of the diencephalon via the
interventricular foramina (of Monro). The fourth ventricle,
located in the rhombencephalon, communicates with the
third ventricle via the cerebral aqueduct (of Sylvius) located
in the mesencephalon.
As the neuroepithelial cells
continue to proliferate, they
establish a thicker wall composed of a pseudostratified
epithelium, each of whose
cells initially extends the entire thickness of the developing
neural tube. As development progresses, some of these neuroepithelial cells remain adjacent to the lumen, whereas most
cells migrate away from it, resulting in a three-layered neural
tube. The layer adjacent to the lumen is known as the ventricular zone (ependymal layer), some of whose cells develop
into ependymal cells that line the ventricles of the brain and
the central canal of the spinal cord. The middle region of the
developing neural tube is the mantle layer (intermediate
zone). The third layer of the developing neural tube, located
the farthest from the lumen is the marginal layer (marginal
zone).
Since these neuroepithelial cells are quite long, initially
they extend from the lumen of the neural tube to its periphery, spanning all three layers. Hence one may name regions
of these cells according to the zone in which they are located.
When a neuroepithelial cell is ready to undergo mitosis its
nucleus migrates from the ventricular zone to the region of
the cell occupying the marginal layer and the cell enters the S
phase (DNA synthesis) of the cell cycle. Upon completion of
the S phase, the nucleus returns to the ventricular zone, and
the cell shortens and becomes round so that the cell is located
completely in the ventricular zone. It is here that the cell
divides to give rise to two daughter cells, which may remain
in the ventricular zone or migrate to the mantle layer or into
the marginal layer (Fig. 2.4).
There appear to be at least two types of neuroepithelial
cells: those that can be stained for glial fibrillary acidic (GFA)
proteins (GFA positive) and those that lack GFA proteins
(GFA negative). GFA-negative cells give rise to an enormous
number of daughter cells that eventually differentiate into
migratory neuroblasts that are no longer able to divide.
GFA-positive cells also give rise to an immense number of
daughter cells that will differentiate into glioblasts and
ependymal cells. Neuroblasts arise first and glioblasts and
ependymal cells originate later. Neuroblasts migrate from
the ventricular zone into the mantle layer where they differentiate into neurons. Glioblasts give rise to all macroglia
(astrocytes and oligodendroglia), and ependymal cells line
the ventricles of the brain and the central canal of the spinal
cord.
As the neuroblasts are differentiating into neurons within
the mantle layer they develop axons that grow into the marginal layer. Concomitantly, many glioblasts will migrate into
the marginal layer, and those that become oligodendroglia
form a protective cellular sheath around the developing
axons, dendrites, and cell bodies within the mantle layer. Many
of the axons will become myelinated by the oligodendroglia.
Thus, in the spinal cord, the mantle layer is the future gray
matter, whereas the marginal layer, composed of numerous
myelinated axons and attendant neuroglia, becomes the
white matter.
Myelination in the CNS begins around the sixteenth week
of gestation and continues until the individual is about 3
years old, although recently it has been shown that in the
frontal lobes of the brain this process may continue into the
early twenties. It is interesting to note that there is a phylogenetic component to the sequence of myelination, in that
the older pathways are myelinated before newer pathways;
also motor roots of spinal nerves are myelinated before
sensory roots.
The mantle layer increases in
thickness in a disproportionate fashion, causing a ventral
and dorsal thickening (basal
plate and alar plate, respectively) of the entire length of
the wall of the future spinal cord. These two thickenings are
separated from each other by a longitudinal furrow, known
as the sulcus limitans. The neuroblasts of the basal plate differentiate into motoneurons, responsible for the motor
function of the spinal cord (ventral gray column), whereas
neuroblasts of the alar plate differentiate into interneurons.
Some of these interneurons will receive sensory information
from primary sensory neurons (including those of the dorsal
root ganglia). In the thoracic and upper lumbar regions (T1
through L2–L3) of the future spinal cord an intermediate
thickening is discerned. Neuroblasts of this region will give
rise to preganglionic sympathetic neurons (forming the
lateral gray column) of the autonomic nervous system. It
should be noted that various synonyms are in common use
among neuroanatomists and some of these are given at the
end of the chapter.
The central midline of the floor (floor plate) and roof
(roof plate) of the neural tube has few, if any, neuroblasts,
and is devoid of nerve cell bodies. However, neuronal processes will be present in these regions, conveying information
between the two halves of the spinal cord.
Neurons of the dorsal root ganglia arise from cells of the
neural crest. These neurons are responsible for delivering
information from the sensory receptor organs to the spinal
cord for processing.
Neuroblasts, which begin
their differentiation as relatively spherical cells, form
two processes at opposite
poles. Usually, one of the
processes, the dendrite,
begins to arborize, whereas the other process, the axon,
remains unbranched. The manner in which the axon and
dendrite are established and modified, permits neurons
to be classified as unipolar (pseudounipolar), bipolar, and
multipolar (Fig. 2.5).
Unipolar (pseudounipolar) neurons are located in sensory ganglia. The two processes of each of these cells begin to
grow toward and fuse with one another, forming a single
process. This unified process then divides into two processes
that grow in opposing directions. One of the processes, the
central process, enters the dorsal horn of the spinal cord
where it may terminate or ascend to higher levels. Collections
of central processes form the dorsal roots of the spinal nerve.
Collections of peripheral processes join the ventral root
fibers to form the spinal nerve.
Bipolar neurons retain their two processes at opposing
poles of the cell body. Dendrites of these cells collect information from the periphery of the body, whereas their axons
deliver information to the CNS for processing. Bipolar neurons
are associated only with the olfactory epithelium, cerebral
cortex, retina, cochlear nucleus, and the vestibular nucleus.
Multipolar neurons instead of having only two processes,
develop several. One of these is the axon, whereas the
remainder are dendrites. Collections of axons of multipolar
neurons of the basal plate grow through the marginal zone to
form the ventral root of the spinal cord. As mentioned above,
they join with collections of peripheral processes of unipolar
neurons of the dorsal root ganglia to form the spinal nerve.
As neuroblasts of the basal
plate differentiate they
become multipolar neurons
whose axons grow not only
into but through the
marginal layer and pierce
the external boundary of the neural tube. Collections of these
axons travel together forming the ventral rootlets of the
spinal cord. These ventral rootlets join others in their vicinity
to form the ventral root of a spinal nerve.
At the same time, central processes of the unipolar neurons of the dorsal root ganglia pierce the external aspect of
the neural tube at the dorsolateral sulcus, and enter the
marginal zone or the alar plate. Central processes that enter
the alar plate form synapses with the interneurons whose
axons form synaptic contacts with motoneurons of the basal
plate, and in this fashion form simple reflex arcs. Those that
enter only the marginal layer travel to higher levels in the
CNS. Many of these central processes travel en masse to reach
their specific destinations. Collections of fibers going to the
same destination are named accordingly.
As described above, collections of the peripheral processes of unipolar neurons join the ventral roots to form the
mixed (motor and sensory) spinal nerves. Motor nerves
effect muscle contraction or glandular secretion, whereas
sensory nerves transmit information from outside or inside
the body. Motor nerves propagate information that goes away
from the CNS to a muscle (or gland) and are called efferent
nerve fibers. Sensory nerves propagate information toward
the CNS and are called afferent nerve fibers.
Motor fibers of spinal nerves
that innervate skeletal muscle are said to be general
somatic efferent (GSE)
fibers, whereas motor fibers that innervate smooth muscle,
cardiac muscle, or glands are said to be general visceral
efferent (GVE) fibers. Sensory fibers that bring information
from the skin, skeletal muscle, tendons, and joints are called
general somatic afferent (GSA) fibers, whereas those that
bring information from the viscera (membranes, glands, and
organs) are named general visceral afferent (GVA) fibers.
The visceral components (GVE) belong to the autonomic
nervous system (sympathetic and parasympathetic); however, GVA fibers are not autonomic fibers. A typical spinal
nerve has all of these four functional components (also
known as modalities). These modalities develop in specific
regions along the alar and basal plates of the spinal cord,
forming columns of recognizable gray matter along the
length of the spinal cord, known as the GSA, GVA, GVE, and
GSE columns.
It should be noted that GVE columns are present only in
the thoracic, upper lumbar (L1–L3), and sacral levels (S2–S4).
The regions of the GSE column responsible for motor
innervation of the upper and lower extremities are quite
extensive and are, therefore, divided into larger medial and
smaller lateral motor columns. The medial motor columns
are responsible for supplying the axial muscles, whereas the
lateral columns serve the extremities. Similarly, in the alar
compartment, the regions that receive information from the
extremities are larger than the remaining areas. It should be
noted that cranial nerves carry additional modalities that are
discussed below.
As discussed above, during early embryogenesis, clusters
of cells, known as somites, form on either side of the developing spinal cord. These somites form the skeletal muscles, skin
(dermatomes), and connective tissue of the body. Skin and
skeletal muscle derived from a particular somite are innervated by neurons arising from the segment of the spinal cord
(and dorsal root ganglion) in its vicinity, giving rise to segmental innervation of the embryo that is conserved in the
adult. Since, in the early embryo, the length of the vertebral
canal equals the length of the spinal cord, the segment of
the spinal cord is at the same level as the body segment.
However, since growth in body length surpasses the lengthening of the spinal cord, in the adult the spinal cord is much
shorter than the vertebral canal and thus (especially caudally), the body segment innervated lies farther away than
it does in the embryo. The region of the vertebral canal that
is devoid of spinal cord in the adult is occupied by the
accumulation of dorsal and ventral rootlets, collectively
known as the cauda equina (as well as the non-nervous pial
filament, the filum terminale). The space occupied by these
structures is an enlarged subarachnoid space, known as the
lumbar cistern.
During early development
the primary brain divisions
—the rhombencephalon,
mesencephalon, and prosencephalon (from caudal
to rostral)—were established,
as were the three flexures, the cephalic, cervical, and pontine
flexures. Since the development of the rhombencephalon
is similar to that of the spinal cord discussed above, the
embryology of the brain will be detailed in the reverse order
to permit a more logical approach to its study. Table 2.4 summarizes the adult structures derived from the three primary
divisions (Fig. 2.6).
The myelencephalon gives
rise to the medulla oblongata, the rostral continuation
of the spinal cord. During the development of the myelencephalon, the pontine flexure arises, and appears to stretch
the roof plate, which becomes a thin epithelial layer. The alar
plates of the two sides move farther away from one another,
and the intervening cavity of the hindbrain becomes the caudal aspect of the fourth ventricle (Fig. 2.7). The junction
between the dorsal edge of the alar plates and the roof plate is
known as the rhombic lip, composed of an inferior and a
superior rhombic lip (located in the myelencephalon and
metencephalon, respectively). Nuclei of cranial nerves VIII
through XII as well as part of the nucleus of the trigeminal
nerve (CN V) are formed from the alar (sensory neurons) and
basal plates (motor neurons). Also, neuroblasts from the alar
plate migrate ventrally to become the neurons constituting
the inferior olivary nuclei (as well as the nucleus gracilis
and nucleus cuneatus). Subsequent to the establishment of
the nuclei fiber tracts will appear, the most pronounced of
which are the pyramids.
The nuclei of cranial nerves VI and VII as well as the remaining portion of cranial nerve
V arise from the alar and
basal plates of the metencephalon. Moreover, two
important, large structures develop from cells migrating
from the alar plates of the metencephalon. One group of cells
migrates ventrally to form the pontine nuclei, whereas the
other group migrates to the superior rhombic lip to form the
cerebellum.
Three groups of motoneurons develop from the basal
plates of the metencephalon: the somatic efferent (gives
rise to the nucleus of the abducent nerve), general visceral
efferent (parasympathetic fibers for the facial nerve), and
special visceral efferent (gives rise to the motor nuclei of
the trigeminal and facial nerves, which will innervate muscles of branchiomeric origin, the first and second branchial
arches).
Three groups of sensory nuclei develop from the alar
plates of the metencephalon: the somatic afferent (neurons
of the trigeminal and some neurons of the vestibulocochlear
nerves), general visceral afferent, and special visceral
afferent.
As neurons of the alar plate undergo intense mitotic activity,
their proliferation causes an expansion of each rhombic lip
(the dorsolateral aspect of the neural tube). As the inferior
aspect of the rhombic lip forms a bulge in the wall of the
fourth ventricle its superior aspect increases greatly in size,
and these two thickenings are known as the cerebellar plates
(Fig. 2.8). The cerebellar plates of the right and left side grow
toward each other and fuse in the midline, each half forming
the future cerebellar hemispheres. The inferior aspect of the
cerebellar plates will become greatly reduced in size and
remain as the roof over the ventricle; in the adult it forms the
vermis. During the process of cerebellar formation, neuroblasts enter the marginal layer and form the cerebellar cortex.
The huge number of cells that are being formed cause folding
of the cortex into leaf-like structures called folia. Neuroblasts
that remain in the mantle layer of the forming cerebellum also
proliferate to form the dentate and deep cerebellar nuclei.
Axons to and from the cerebellar cortex form very large
tracts, such as the superior, middle, and inferior cerebellar
peduncles and the corticopontocerebellar pathway.
The mesencephalon is situated rostral to the pons and is
the region of the midbrain
flexure. Its wall becomes
quite thick, obliterating much of the central lumen, which
becomes a narrow cleft—the cerebral aqueduct (of Sylvius)
connecting the third and fourth ventricles. The alar plates
give rise to the tectum, composed of the superior and inferior colliculi, which are reflex centers for visual and auditory
signals, respectively. Additionally, the alar plate is believed
to give rise to the periaqueductal gray. The basal plate is
responsible for the formation of the tegmentum, whose red
nucleus and substantia nigra, along with the nuclei of the
oculomotor and trochlear nerves, arise from its neuroblasts.
With continued development of the cerebral cortex the ventral aspect of the mesencephalon thickens considerably,
forming the cerebral peduncles, fiber tracts leading to and
from the cerebral cortex.
The prosencephalon is the forebrain and is divided into two
regions, the diencephalon and the prosencephalon.
The three regions of the diencephalon—the epithalamus,
thalamus, and hypothalamus—form as three separate bulges
in the walls of the third ventricle. The habenular nuclei and
the pineal body form the epithalamus. The largest portion of
the diencephalon, the thalamus, is separated from the underlying hypothalamus by the hypothalamic sulcus, a transverse
groove in the wall of the third ventricle. The close functional
association of the thalamus with the cerebral cortex necessitates a synchronous developmental association between
these two structures. As nuclei within the thalamus (medial
and lateral geniculate bodies, as well as the medial, lateral,
anterior, and ventral thalamic nuclei) increase in size, they
bulge into the third ventricle, decreasing its size. Frequently,
the nuclei of the right and left thalami fuse at a small region
across the third ventricle, forming the massa intermedia.
Nuclei within the hypothalamus form ventral to the
hypothalamic sulcus. These nuclei will be responsible for
monitoring and controlling various endocrine and autonomic functions. Additionally, a ventral evagination of the
hypothalamus is responsible for the formation of the median
eminence and the infundibulum (see below).
As the diencephalon develops, the roof of the third ventricle becomes extremely thin, so that it is formed only of a
layer of ependymal cells and the vascular pia mater. This
vascular roof invaginates into the third ventricle, forming the
choroid plexus. Although choroid plexuses develop in all of
the ventricles of the brain, their developmental process is
identical to that occurring in the third ventricle and is not
treated again during the discussions of the other ventricles. Concomitant with the development of this choroid
plexus, three bulges become evident on the floor of the third
ventricle, and these form the mammillary bodies, the infundibulum, and the optic chiasma.
The infundibulum of the diencephalon is a downward
evagination of the floor of the third ventricle. As the
infundibulum grows down, it meets an ectodermal diverticulum of the oral cavity, known as Rathke’s pouch. These two
structures fuse with each other to form the pituitary gland
(hypophysis). The neurohypophysis (median eminence,
stalk, and pars nervosa) arises from the infundibulum,
whereas the adenohypophysis (pars tuberalis, pars distalis, and pars intermedia) derives from Rathke’s pouch
(Fig. 2.9). A small colloid-filled cleft frequently remains as a
vestige of the lumen of Rathke’s pouch, in the pars intermedia.
During the third week of gestation, the ventrolateral wall on
each side of the future diencephalon gives rise to an optic
vesicle. These hollow vesicles grow in a lateral direction,
reach the basal lamina of the head ectoderm, and induce the
ectoderm to form the lens placode, the precursor of the lens
of the eye. The optic vesicle invaginates to form a two-layered
structure, known as the optic cup, which gives rise to the
nervous and pigmented layers of the retina; the connection
between the optic cup and the forming brain becomes known
as the optic stalk (Fig. 2.10). As axons growing out of the
developing retina increase the thickness of the wall of the
optic stalk, its lumen becomes obliterated, and the optic
stalk becomes known as the optic nerve. The optic nerves of
the right and left sides join in the midline to form the optic
chiasma, where axons arising from the medial half of each
retina cross over to the opposite side.
As the rim of the optic cup, in contact with the lens
placode, encircles the prospective lens to form the iris, a
slight cleft (choroid fissure) remains, permitting the future
central artery and vein of the retina access to the retina.
The rostral extent of the neural tube is the telencephalon,
which extends from the diencephalon to the lamina terminalis, the anteriormost boundary of the neural tube. The
telencephalon undergoes a tremendous growth spur, forming the two telencephalic vesicles that will overgrow much of
the brain by developing into the two cerebral hemispheres.
The lumina of the telencephalic vesicles remain as the
large, cerebrospinal fluid-filled lateral ventricles. These two
ventricles will communicate with each other as well as
with the third ventricle via the interventricular foramen (of
Monro).
Growth of the telencephalic vesicles is asymmetric, in
that the lateral expansion, forming the prospective insula,
enlarges less than do the dorsal, posterior, and medial
regions. In fact, some of these regions overgrow and cover the
insula and, in the adult, they are named the temporal, frontal,
and frontoparietal opercula. The anterior expansion is also
slight, forming the future olfactory bulb. Continued growth
of the telencephalic vesicles within the limited space of the
cranial cavity is responsible for the folding of the developing
cerebral cortex into elevations called gyri and intervening
grooves, known as sulci. Some of the deeper grooves are
named fissures; these separate lobes of the cerebral hemispheres from each other.
Major fiber tracts—the optic chiasma, anterior commissure, and the corpus callosum—develop in the region of the
lamina terminalis. These fiber tracts connect similar areas of
the right and left cerebral hemispheres to each other.
The superior aspect of the telencephalic vesicle, known as
the pallium, is responsible for the formation of the cerebral
cortex, a thin layer of gray matter covering the great mass of
white matter of the cerebral hemispheres. Neuroblasts of the
inferior aspect of the telencephalic vesicles undergo intense
mitotic activity, forming a highly cellular region. Due to the
large number of axons that pass through this cell-rich area,
connecting the cerebral cortex to other regions of the brain
and to the spinal cord, this area appears striated and is thus
referred to as the corpus striatum. Many of these fibers join to
form a major fiber tract, the internal capsule, that will isolate
clusters of cells of the corpus striatum from each other; these
cell clusters develop into the lentiform nucleus (putamen
and globus pallidus) and the caudate nucleus.
The most common defect of the neural tube is incomplete fusion of the neural
groove, resulting in spina bifida cystica. This involves a protrusion of the
spinal cord tissue through a bony defect, so that a portion of the nervous tissue
is visible on the individual’s back as a cyst-like structure. There are various
degrees of spina bifida, the worst of which involves mental retardation as well
as paralysis below the level of the lesion. Although the cause of this anomaly
is not known, there are several agents, such as an excess maternal intake of
vitamin A and hyperthermia, that increase its incidence. Newer diagnostic
methods, such as ultrasound examination during the eleventh and subsequent
weeks of gestation, as well as measuring a-fetoprotein levels in the amniotic
fluid, can indicate and detect the presence of spina bifida cystica.
Spinal dermal sinus is a condition that frequently displays the presence
of a slight depression, similar to a dimple, in the midline of the sacral region of
the back. This slight depression is indicative of the final fusion of the sacral
spinal cord level, where the separation of the neural tube from the surface
ectoderm was almost incomplete. In fact, occasionally a fibrous cord persists
between the dura mater and the dermis just beneath the dimple.
Hydrocephalus is a condition where the ventricles of the brain or the subarachnoid spaces (in external hydrocephalus) accumulate an excessive amount
of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). In the neonate this is most frequently a result of
occlusion of the cerebral aqueduct that hinders the flow of CSF from the third
into the fourth ventricle. In very extensive cases, the continued manufacture of
CSF by the choroid plexuses of the two lateral and third ventricles increases the
fluid volume of the ventricles, resulting in enlargement of the head, reduction
in the thickness of the bones of the cranium, and compression of the walls of
the ventricles. Such compression may cause lamination of the cerebral cortex
resulting in severe mental retardation. A type of hydrocephalus, known as
communicating hydrocephalus, is caused by the Arnold–Chiari malformation. This anomalous condition is characterized by herniation of the
cerebellum and medulla into the foramen magnum, which impedes absorption
of CSF, leading to the expansion of the ventricles with subsequent enlargement of the head. Arnold–Chiari malformation usually accompanies severe
cases of spina bifida.
Anencephalus is due to the lack of fusion of the anterior neural groove. It
is thus similar to spina bifida, in that the nervous tissue (in this case the brain)
is open to the environment rather than being enclosed in the bony cranium.
Usually the nervous tissue is directly continuous with the skin of the scalp.
Frequently vascular agenesis accompanies this condition and much of the
forming brain becomes necrotic a few weeks prior to birth.
Microcephaly is a condition with varied causes, such as maternal pelvic
X-irradiation, a recessive genetic trait, or infection of the fetus with toxoplasmosis. As the name implies, microcephaly is characterized by a small head and
small brain. The cerebral cortex is usually hypocellular with a resultant mental
retardation and predisposition to motor disorders and seizures.
Agyri (lissencephaly) is characterized by the absence of fissures and sulci
and an indiscriminate arrangement of neurons. This occurs as a result of
decreased cellular activity and a consequent diminishing of brain growth.
Corpus callosum agenesis, an infrequent but interesting condition, is
characterized by the absence of the corpus callosum, the major communicating
pathway between the two cerebral hemispheres. Occasionally the condition is
asymptomatic and individuals may be of average IQ. Frequently, however,
mental deficiency and the occurrence of tremors and seizures are present.
Holoprosencephaly, defective development of the prosencephalon, may
be of varying severity, extending from major malformation of the calvaria,
forebrain, and midfacial skeleton to minor malformations involving these
regions. The primary etiology of this condition is the consumption of alcohol
during the first month or so of pregnancy. It should be stressed that even small
quantities of alcohol consumed during this time and even a single instance of
“binge” drinking may cause severe retardation and deformations of the midface. The association of alcohol consumption and holoprosencephaly is also
referred to as the fetal alcohol syndrome.
This newborn has a
myelomeningocele, generically
known as spina bifida. A myelomeningocele is one of the disorders in a group of
conditions known as neural tube defects,
otherwise known as dysraphism. A neural tube defect can occur along any part of
the developing CNS. When it affects the
region that should eventually become the
brain it is known as anencephaly, meaning the brain is literally absent. However,
it most commonly affects the most caudal
portion and becomes know as spina
bifida. There is failure of closure and neurulation of the neural tube. This occurs
during the first few weeks of gestation.
Spina bifida cystica refers to an open
spinal defect where nervous tissue
and/or meninges protrude from a defect
in the vertebral column and are exposed
to the outside environment on the surface
of the back. A myelomeningocele is an
open defect where the spinal cord and
meninges are exposed and often form a
tumor-like mass in the midline just above
the buttock. Spina bifida occulta refers to
a closed spinal defect where skin covers
the defect, and the spinal cord and
meninges are within the defective
vertebral column. A closed spinal defect
is obviously milder than an open one.
An overlying cutaneous abnormality,
such as a tuft of hair or hemangioma, or a
subcutaneous lipoma (a benign fatty
tumor) may betray an underlying closed
spinal defect. Both give rise to neurologic
deficits, though those with open spinal
defects are already present at birth and
tend to be severe. Neurologic deficits
such as leg weakness, sensory deficits in
the legs, and urinary incontinence can
occur much later in a closed spinal defect.
This can present any time from early
childhood to adulthood. It often occurs
secondary to a tethered cord syndrome
(a low-lying conus medullaris related to
anchoring of the spinal cord or filum
terminale to surrounding tissues).
A myelomeningocele needs to be surgically repaired within 48 hours of birth.
The mortality rate from infection or other
complications would otherwise be near
100%. A downward herniation of the
cerebellum through the foramen magnum is always present (Chiari II malformation). Hydrocephalus may also be
present and both of these conditions may
require surgery. Orthopedic malformations of the hip and/or feet often occur
and may need to be corrected surgically.
Folic acid supplement very early in
pregnancy decreases the incidence of
neural tube defects, although the reason
is unclear. The incidence is decreasing
in the Western world, though it is still a
common fetal malformation.
A 32-year-old man complains
of numbness and tingling in his
left arm which began 5 days ago. He has
also noted some recent “staggering”
when walking and he feels quite off balance. There is no dizziness or weakness.
He knows of no precipitating event. He
has no other complaints. Upon asking
about past history, he recalls that about 3
years ago he had an episode of bilateral
leg paralysis and poor sensation in the
legs. This improved over the course of 2
months and his legs got back to normal.
No specific etiology was found at that
time. He has not followed up with a
doctor.
Examination shows sensory loss and
altered sensation to stimulation in the left
distal upper extremity and hand. Finger
movements in both hands show poor
coordination, somewhat more so on the
left, but there is no weakness found in the
face, arms, or legs. Gait is mildly ataxic.
He cannot walk heel to toe in a straight
line. Reflexes in the arms are normal, and
are brisk at the knees and ankles but not
necessarily pathologically so. Neurologic
exam is otherwise unremarkable.
Aside from the meninges, vascular supply, and minor connective tissue elements, the central nervous system (CNS) is
composed only of cells. These are categorized into two types:
neurons, which receive and transmit impulses, and neuroglia, which support and facilitate the proper functioning
of the neurons. A collection of neurons within the CNS is
referred to as a nucleus (not to be confused with the nucleus
of a cell), whereas a collection of neurons in the peripheral
nervous system (PNS) is known as a ganglion.
Neurons form reflex arcs, where information from the
periphery is carried by a sensory neuron to the CNS, and is
directly transmitted to a motoneuron for a motor response.
This is the simplest reflex arc because it involves only two
neurons. An example of a two cell reflex arc is the patellar
reflex (knee jerk). Most reflex arcs are three or more cell reflex
arcs, since they include a third neuron, the interneuron,
interposed between the sensory neuron and the motoneuron.
The reflex response associated with a three cell reflex may be
overridden when the interneuron receives an input from
higher centers of the brain that prevent it from transmitting
the information from the sensory neuron to the motoneuron.
Neurons communicate with each other as well as with
other target cells through specialized cell junctions, known
as synapses. There are two types of synapse. They may be
electrical (gap junctions), where ions or small molecules
may go from one cell into another cell by traversing small,
contiguous channels present in the cell membranes of the two
cells. The other type are chemical, where one cell releases
ligands (e.g., neurotransmitters) into a narrow intercellular
space, known as the synaptic cleft, and the ligand binds to
receptors of the other cell’s membrane, initiating the desired
result.
Neuroglia are located both in the CNS and in the PNS.
They act to support the neuron, both physically and nutritionally, to protect the neuron by forming an insulating
sheath around it and its processes, as well as to isolate the
neuron and its processes from the external milieu. It is interesting to note that the number of neuroglia far outnumber the
number of neurons.
The neuron has two regions,
the cell body (perikaryon,
soma) and neuronal processes called dendrites and
axons (Fig. 3.1); a neuron
may possess several dendrites but it has only a single axon.
Dendrites and axons frequently possess a higher percentage
of the neuron’s cytoplasm than does the soma, due to the
large number of dendrites per neuron as well as due to the,
possibly, great length of the axon.
The size and morphology of
the cell body vary and are
specific to the particular
region of the nervous system. The most prominent feature of
the soma is the nucleus, which is usually round to oval, centrally placed, and possesses a fine chromatin network and a
well-defined nucleolus. The cytoplasm of the perikaryon is
rich in free ribosomes and rough endoplasmic reticulum
(RER), whose cisternae form numerous close, parallel
configurations which, when viewed with light microscopy,
stain dark blue with acidophilic stains and are frequently
referred to as Nissl bodies. Protein synthesis occurs on both
free ribosomes for use in the cytosol and on the RER for eventual packaging. The Golgi complex is usually near the
nucleus and is responsible for the modification and packaging of the various proteins, enzymes, and chemical messenger
molecules manufactured on the RER. Numerous profiles
of smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SER) are also present in
the neuronal cytoplasm. Many of these are located just deep
to the plasmalemma as hypolemmal cisternae, believed to be
responsible for the sequestering of calcium. The energy
requirement of the neuron is met by the presence of numerous mitochondria, which are distributed throughout the cell
body. As such, protein synthesis, respiration, and many of
the essential cellular functions occur in this region of the
cell (Fig. 3.2). The cell body is also rich in endosomes and
lysosomes, as well as various types of vesicles that are being
ferried to and from the processes.
The cell body also contains numerous inclusions, nonliving substances such as melanin pigments, lipofuscin, and
lipid droplets. Melanin pigments are present in cells only in
certain locations, such as the locus cereus and the substantia nigra, but their function in these cells is not known.
Lipofuscin is believed to be the indigestible remains of
lysosomal activity and, since it is known to increase as a function of age, it is frequently referred to as “age pigment.”
Lipid droplets are present in the cytoplasm of neurons, and in
other cells, as a form of energy reserve.
Cytoskeletal components of neurons consist of microfilaments, neurofilaments, and microtubules. Microfilaments,
composed mostly of filamentous actin, are associated
mainly with the cell membrane and aid in axon or dendrite
elongation and in the movement of the plasmalemma.
Neurofilaments are intermediate filaments that frequently
become clumped during preparation for light microscopy,
forming long filamentous threads known as neurofibrils
(less than 2 µm in diameter). Neurofilaments assist in the
regeneration and development of axons and dendrites.
Microtubules are long, rigid, flexible structures that possess
microtubule-associated proteins (such as MAP-2 in the cytoplasm and dendrites and MAP-3 in the axon). Microtubules
provide a scaffold-like structure to maintain cell shape and
aid in the transport of materials to and from the soma.
Dendrites, whose proximal
region may house organelles, such as RER, SER,
mitochondria, and vesicles,
are relatively short, branching extensions of the cell body. Each neuron may have a
number of dendrites, each of which receives signals from
specialized receptors, axons, or other neurons and transmits
these signals toward the cell body. Often the surface of some
dendrites is increased due to the presence of dendritic
spines, permitting the presence of a greater number of
synapses. Moreover, since dendrites are usually highly
branched structures they may receive information concurrently from many different sources.
The axon is divided into
three regions: the initial
segment, the axon proper,
and the axon terminals. The
initial segment is the
short transition (30–50 µm in
length) between the axon hillock and the axon proper. A
characteristic feature of the initial segment is the thickening
on the axoplasmic aspect of the axolemma (axon membrane)
that is believed to be indicative of the presence of voltagegated sodium channels. The initial segment is the primary
region of the axon responsible for the initiation and propagation
of action potentials.
The axon proper is a long process (in some instances
exceeding 100 cm in length), whose diameter, which may be
as great as 15–20 µm, remains constant for much of its length.
Axons may possess a myelin covering (see below) that
begins at the axon proper and stops at the axon terminal. The
myelin sheath is elaborated in discontinuous segments, and
each myelinated segment is called an internode. The discontinuities of myelin between adjacent internodes are referred
to as nodes of Ranvier. Occasionally the axon proper has
branches, known as collaterals, that diverge from the main
axon at right angles. At its terminus the axon may arborize,
forming numerous axon terminals (also known as bouton
terminaux and end feet), which permits a single axon to
make synaptic contact (see below) with numerous other
neurons (or muscle or gland cells). The axoplasm does not
possess ribosomes or RER, although mitochondria, SER,
vesicles, neurofilaments, and microtubules are present.
Material produced in the soma is transported, via the
assistance of microtubules and their microtubule-associated
proteins, to the axon for its use. Such transport is referred to
as anterograde transport. Material, such as horseradish peroxidase, may be conveyed in the opposite direction, toward
the cell body, and this process is referred to as retrograde
transport. Collectively, anterograde and retrograde transports are referred to as axonal transport, a process that is
dependent on the presence of the ATPase molecular motors
dynein and kinesin. The former is responsible for retrograde
transport, whereas the latter functions in anterograde transport. Table 3.1 details the types and velocity of transport and
the substances being transported. Axonal transport is essential for the health of the muscle cell or the gland that is being
innervated. If this trophic relationship is interrupted, the
muscle or gland atrophies.
A synapse may be electrical
with a synaptic cleft width
of 2–4 nm or chemical with
a synaptic cleft width of
20–30 nm. In an electrical
synapse ions are exchanged
via gap junctions, whereas
in a chemical synapse messenger molecules (ligands) are
housed in synaptic vesicles and are released into the synaptic
cleft. These messenger molecules are of two types, namely
neurotransmitters and neuromodulators, and they are
released from the axon terminal to depolarize (or hyperpolarize) the membrane of the effector cell. Since electrical
synapses are seldom present in mammals (except in the
retina, cerebral cortex, and brainstem), only chemical
synapses will be discussed in this textbook and the reader is
referred to a textbook of histology or cell biology to become
familiar with the structure of gap junctions.
There are several types of possible synaptic contacts
within the CNS (Fig. 3.3), depending upon the regions of the
neurons involved (e.g., axoaxonic, axosomatic, axodendritic,
dendrodendritic), the most common being the axodendritic,
where the axon of one neuron synapses with the dendrite
of another neuron. In all chemical synapses the “message”
travels across the synaptic cleft to the effector cell, giving rise
to the terminology: presynaptic cell (the neuron releasing
the messenger molecules) and postsynaptic cell (the effector
cell). Thus there are three major functional components of a
synapse, namely the presynaptic membrane, the synaptic
cleft, and the postsynaptic membrane. These membranes are
specialized so that the messenger molecules contained in the
synaptic vesicles are released at the proper sites (active sites)
on the presynaptic membrane, and so that they bind to
receptor molecules located at specific sites of the postsynaptic membrane. When seen in electron micrographs,
the cytoplasmic aspect of either one of these membranes
frequently displays a filamentous electron density known as
the presynaptic density or postsynaptic density. Depending
on the arrangement of these submembrane densities, the
synapses are said to be either type I or type II (Table 3.2).
Type I synapses are also known as asymmetric synapses
since their postsynaptic density is thicker than their
presynaptic density. Type II synapses are also referred to as
symmetric synapses since the two densities are of equal
thickness. Usually, type I synapses possess round synaptic
vesicles whereas type II synapses possess flattened synaptic
vesicles. Generally, type I synapses are excitatory, so that the
membrane of the effector cell becomes depolarized, initiating
an excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP). Conversely,
type II synapses are usually inhibitory, initiating an inhibitory postsynaptic potential (IPSP) so that the membrane
of the effector cell becomes hyperpolarized, causing it to be
less responsive to attempts at depolarization.
The cytoplasm of the axon
terminal is rich in cytoskeletal elements, such as microtubules, neurofilaments,
spectrin, and microfilaments. Additionally, it
also houses cisternae of SER, coated vesicles, occasional
endosomes, a number of mitochondria, and numerous
synaptic vesicles. Synaptic vesicles are membrane-bound
vesicles whose membranes contain numerous unique integral proteins that assist in binding the vesicles to specific sites
within the axon terminal. They contain chemical messengers
(ligands, neurotransmitter molecules), ATP, and some proteoglycans, all of which are destined to be released into the
synaptic cleft. Some of these synaptic vesicles are held in
reserve away from the active site, whereas others are located
at the active site.
The submembrane density on the cytoplasmic aspect of
the presynaptic membrane is composed of globular to
oblong electron-dense subunits that are arranged in a hexagonal array at the active site (Fig. 3.4). These oblong structures
are protein complexes, known as docking complexes, which
form a presynaptic grid whose interstices are just large
enough to accept synaptic vesicles but prevent these vesicles
from contacting the presynaptic membrane.
Most synaptic vesicles are held in reserve, away from the
active site. However, some are bound (docked) to the docking
complex so that when an action potential arrives at the
axon terminal they are ready to fuse with the presynaptic
membrane, open into the synaptic cleft, and release their
messenger molecules.
The arrival of an action potential at the presynaptic membrane opens voltage-gated calcium channels located at the
active site (possibly as a part of the docking complex), permitting the influx of Ca2+ ions into the axon terminal (Fig. 3.5).
The presence of Ca2+ ions permits the fusion of the membrane
of the docked synaptic vesicle with the presynaptic membrane
and the subsequent release of its messenger molecules into
the synaptic cleft. Precise control of calcium availability is
necessary to ensure that only the required amount of messenger molecules are released as the consequence of a single
action potential.
The sequestering of Ca2+ ions is performed by at least
three mechanisms:
1 A cytosolic protein binds Ca2+ ions in the vicinity of the
presynaptic membrane.
2 Calcium storage vesicles located in the axon terminal possess Ca2+ pumps that remove Ca2+ ions from the end-foot
cytosol.
3 Na+/Ca2+-coupled transporters in the axon terminal
membrane exchange extracellular Na+ ions for cytosolic
Ca2+ ions.
These three mechanisms act in conjunction with each other to
control Ca2+ availability at the active site (Fig. 3.6).
Continued synaptic vesicle fusion with and incorporation
into the presynaptic membrane would enlarge the axon terminal; therefore, the excess membrane is recaptured by the
formation of clathrin-coated pits. The pits form clathrincoated vesicles and the captured membranes are returned to
the cytosol. They travel as endocytic vesicles, possibly along
microtubule-marked pathways. These vesicles lose their
clathrin coat before fusing with the elements of SER to be
recycled in the formation of new synaptic vesicles.
Since the flow of Ca2+ ions into the axon terminal is very
important for the release of the messenger molecules into the
synaptic cleft, a method of diminishing its entry into the endfoot has evolved in mammals, a process known as presynaptic inhibition. This process occurs in areas where an axon
forms a synapse with the axon terminal of another axon
(Fig. 3.7). Hence, there are three neurons involved at this
location:
1 The axon terminal of neuron A contacting the axon terminal of neuron B.
2 The axon terminal of neuron B that contacts neuron C.
3 The dendrite (or soma) of neuron C.
The axon terminal of neuron A releases a chemical messenger destined for Cl− ion channels of the axon terminal of
neuron B. The binding of the ligands opens Cl− ion channels
causing an influx of Cl− ions into the axon terminal of neuron
B, hyperpolarizing its presynaptic membrane and making it
much more difficult to open its voltage-gated Ca2+ ion channels. This event makes it less likely that neuron B will be able
to release its chemical messengers intended for neuron C, and
it is this inhibition of the activity of neuron B that is referred
to as presynaptic inhibition.
The synaptic cleft is a 20–
30 nm wide extracellular space
between the presynaptic and
postsynaptic membranes.
This space contains diverse
families of macromolecules, some of which appear to be
filamentous and span the entire width of the synaptic cleft.
Many of these macromolecules are believed to be the extracytoplasmic aspects of the various transmembrane proteins
of the presynaptic and postsynaptic membranes, whereas
others are molecules of the extracellular matrix. It has been
demonstrated that many of these synaptic cleft proteins are
necessary to maintain a rigorous alignment of the active sites
of the presynaptic membrane with those regions of the postsynaptic membrane that house receptor molecules designed
to bind the released chemical messengers. These chemical
substances, released in predetermined quantities, known as
quanta (as many as 20,000 molecules), cross the synaptic cleft
and bind to specific receptor molecules of the postsynaptic
membrane. Each synaptic vesicle contains one quantum of
chemical messenger molecules, which is the minimum
amount necessary to precipitate a single postsynaptic event
(depolarization or hyperpolarization).
The postsynaptic membrane is a region of the effector cell
plasmalemma that is modified to receive and react to the
chemical messenger (ligand) released into the synaptic cleft.
Binding of the ligand results in the opening of ion channels
with subsequent depolarization or hyperpolarization of the
effector cell plasmalemma. The submembrane density of the
postsynaptic membrane is connected, via thin filamentous
material, to an abundance of intertwined cytoskeletal elements, the subsynaptic web. The cytosol in the immediate
vicinity of the subsynaptic web houses, among others, microtubules, microfilaments, SER and, frequently, RER along with
numerous mitochondria. The cytosol also contains enzymes
such as protein kinase C and calmodulin-dependent kinase
II. The postsynaptic membrane houses two major types of
receptors: ionotropic and metabotropic receptors.
1 Ionotropic receptors are ligand-gated ion channels and
the chemical messengers that bind to them are known as
neurotransmitters. The binding of a neurotransmitter
alters the conformation of the protein constituting the
ion channel, opening it and permitting the flow of ions
through it. Thus, a neurotransmitter is a chemical messenger that has a direct effect on the ion channel and the effect
is rapid.
2 Metabotropic receptors bind chemical messengers
known as neuromodulators or neurohormones. These
molecules also interact with a receptor molecule, causing
a conformational change in its protein(s); however, this
receptor molecule is not an ion channel. Instead, this
receptor molecule interacts with other protein complexes,
such as G-proteins. G-proteins in turn interact with one of
the cell’s secondary messenger systems, thus modulating
the metabolic activities of the effector cell. In this fashion the required response occurs as an indirect function
of the coupling of the ligand to the receptor and the effect
is slow.
The above two points are true in most instances, but there
are exceptions. The following generalization should therefore be appreciated, namely that neurotransmitters have a direct
influence, whereas neuromodulators and neurohormones have an
indirect influence in effecting the desired result. It is also
important to realize that the same chemical messenger may
elicit different responses depending on the type of ionotropic
or metabotropic receptor with which it is associated. The
various types of neurotransmitters and neuromodulators
are discussed in Chapter 4.
The number of processes a neuron possesses permits a
classification of these cells into the following categories:
unipolar, bipolar, multipolar, and pseudounipolar neurons
(Fig. 3.8). Unipolar neurons are rare in vertebrates; they possess no dendrites, only an axon. Bipolar neurons, such as the
ones in the olfactory mucosa, possess an axon and a dendrite,
whereas multipolar neurons, such as the motoneurons of the
spinal cord, have a single axon and two or more dendrites.
An additional type of neuron, the pseudounipolar neuron
(also referred to as unipolar neurons in vertebrates) start out,
during embryogenesis, as bipolar neurons. The axon and
dendrite of this neuron fuse into a single process that later
bifurcates. Neurons of the dorsal root ganglia and the ganglia
of cranial nerves are representatives of this category.
There are five types of supporting cells associated with
the nervous system, four in
the CNS (astroglia, oligodendroglia, microglia, and ependymal cells) and one in the PNS
(Schwann cells) (Table 3.3). Neuroglia of the CNS are usually
smaller and about 10 times more numerous than neurons.
Astrocytes are stellate-shaped cells with numerous, long
processes that extend between and among the neurons and
vascular elements occupying much of the extracellular spaces
of the CNS. Their processes surround all neural elements and
also form gap junctions with one another. Additionally,
astrocytes form a perivascular covering around blood vessels as well as a glial-limiting membrane at the interface of
the brain and pia mater. There are two types of astrocytes:
fibrous astrocytes, located in white matter, and protoplasmic
astrocytes, located in gray matter. Both types of astrocytes
are characterized by the unique glial fibrillary acidic protein
(GFAP) intermediate filaments contained in their cytoplasm.
Astrocytes are believed to:
• provide physical and nutritional support to the neurons
of the CNS;
• sequester Na+ and K+ ions from the extracellular space;
• isolate neurons from each other;
• metabolize extracellular neurotransmitters, such as serotonin, gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA), and glutamate;
• form glial scar tissue in an attempt to repair damage to the
CNS; and
• form a framework along which developing neurons
migrate to their destination during embryogenesis.
Oligodendroglia are small cells that possess only a few
processes and their cytoplasm is devoid of GFAP. They are
present in gray matter, where they abut neurons and are
sometimes referred to as satellite oligodendrocytes. They
are most numerous in white matter, where they form myelin
sheaths around axons. Each oligodendroglion may myelinate
a single internode of as many as 30 axons.
Microglia are the smallest of the neuroglia and, unlike
the others, they are derived from monocytes that, as they
leave the bloodstream and enter the substance of the CNS,
differentiate into small macrophages. Microglia function
in the phagocytosis of damaged tissues and participate in
inflammatory and degenerative reactions.
Ependymal cells form the simple cuboidal to simple
columnar epithelial lining of the ventricles of the brain and
the central canal of the spinal cord. These cells possess cilia in
some regions of the spinal canal and ventricles facilitating the
circulation of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Ependymal cells in
certain regions of the ventricles become modified and participate in the formation of the choroid plexus, the structures
that are responsible for the elaboration of the CSF. Some of
the ependymal cells of the third ventricle are modified and
are known as tanycytes. These modified ependymal cells
possess long processes that approximate capillaries and
certain neurosecretory cells of the hypothalamus. It is speculated that they may transport CSF to these cells.
Schwann cells are present only in the PNS. They are
derived from neural crest cells that migrate during development to the sites of axon formation and elongation. These
cells envelop the forming axons, isolating them from the
surrounding environment. Schwann cells invest all unmyelinated axons as well as forming the myelin sheath of all
myelinated axons of the PNS. Unlike oligodendroglia, a
Schwann cell is capable of myelinating only a single internode of a single axon. Schwann cells form their own basal
lamina and extracellular matrix, hence they are capable of
synthesizing type IV collagen, the glycoproteins fibronectin
and laminin, as well as various proteoglycans. Schwann
cells also function during degeneration and regeneration of
axons.
Each axon is served by a
large number of oligodendroglia or neuroglia, since a
single one of these cells is
capable of myelinating only
a short segment of an axon. These short, myelin-wrapped
segments are known as internodes (200–1,000 µm in length),
and the unmyelinated regions of the axon located between
adjacent internodes are known as nodes of Ranvier (Fig. 3.9).
As described above, oligodendroglia myelinate in the CNS only and Schwann cells myelinate in the PNS only. Moreover,
a single oligodendroglion is able to myelinate a single internode of as many as 30 different axons (Fig. 3.10), whereas
a single Schwann cell is capable of myelinating only one
internode of one axon.
Although the mechanism of myelination is not understood, it is believed that the process is similar whether it
occurs in the peripheral or the central nervous system, therefore, only Schwann cell myelination will be discussed here.
As the axon reaches 1 µm in diameter, Schwann cells proliferate, forming a continuous chain of cells along the length of the
axon. As they envelop the axon, they begin to layer their
membranes (as many as 50 or more layers) in a spiral fashion
around the axon (Fig. 3.11). As the developing myelin sheath
becomes more tightly wound, the cytoplasm of the wrapped
region retracts into the Schwann cell body, and the cytoplasmic aspects of the apposing cell membranes approximate
each other. Moreover, the extracytoplasmic aspects of the cell
membranes also approach one another.
Viewed with the electron microscope the myelin sheath
presents the appearance of concentric, wider, electron-dense
lines alternating with concentric, narrower, less electrondense lines. The wider lines (3 nm in width) represent the
apposition of the cytoplasmic surfaces of the Schwann cell
plasmalemma, and are called major dense lines. The narrower lines represent the apposition of the outer surfaces of
the Schwann cell plasmalemma, and are known as intraperiod lines. Although these lines appearto be concentric, they
are actually spiral lines. The outer surfaces of the Schwann
cell plasmalemma do not contact each other, necessitating a
change of terminology to intraperiod gap. This intraperiod
gap is believed to be a conduit so that small molecules can
reach the axon. The beginning of the internal aspect (closest
to the axolemma) of the intraperiod gap is known as the
internal mesaxon, whereas the distal aspect of the intraperiod gap (at the external surface of the myelin sheath) is
referred to as the external mesaxon.
At the edges of the Schwann cell, in the region of the node
of Ranvier, bubbles of cytoplasm remain that separate the
major dense line. Additionally, some of the cytoplasm may
remain in the region of the internode, forming oblique arrays
of bubbles of cytoplasm. When whole mounts of teased
myelinated nerve fibers are viewed with the light microscope
these areas appear as clear slanted lines in the myelin sheaths
and are known as clefts (incisures) of Schmidt–Lantermann.
The process of myelination occurs over a period of several
years and, as such, some axons are myelinated much sooner
than others. Motor nerves are the first to be myelinated
whereas sensory nerves are not myelinated until several
months after birth. Certain regions of the CNS do not become
completely myelinated until several years after birth.
Myelin is composed of approximately 70–80% lipids and
the remainder consists of proteins and water. The preponderant lipid constituent is cholesterol, followed by phospholipids and glycosphingolipids. There are several proteins
whose roles in the structural integrity of the myelin sheath
are beginning to be understood (Table 3.4). P0 and P2 are present mostly in PNS myelin, P1 is located in both PNS and CNS
myelin, and proteolipid protein (PLP) is the major structural
protein that is present only in CNS myelin. All of these proteins are transmembrane proteins and are believed to play a
role in the compaction of the major dense line, since their
cytoplasmic aspects are composed of highly charged amino
acids that attract their counterparts on the other side of the
membrane. Another protein, myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG), has globular subunits that extend into the extracellular space (into the intraperiod gap) of the myelin sheaths
of both the CNS and PNS. Here they contact MAGs from the other side, thus establishing adhesive forces that hold the
external aspects of the Schwann cell plasmalemma in close
proximity. The cytoplasmic aspects of this transmembrane
protein are associated with the cytoskeletal components
spectrin and actin, thus reinforcing the rigorous architecture
of the myelin sheath.
Nerve fibers transmit information along their membranes,
which become depolarized subsequent to suitable stimulation. Modulation of the transmembrane resting potential,
due to the actions of voltage-gated ion channels, results in the
transmission of an electrical signal along the dendrites, soma,
and/or axon either as an action potential or as a postsynaptic potential.
The resting potential is the
voltage difference existing
between the two sides (cytoplasmic and extracellular)
of the semipermeable
membrane of any cell. This voltage difference is present only in the immediate vicinity of
the membrane, since deeper in the cytoplasm and farther out
in the extracellular space the electric charges are neutral.
Neurons possess constant permeability K+ ion channels that
establish a specific charge difference (potential difference)
between the two sides of the membrane, so that its cytoplasmic aspect appears negative with respect to its extracellular
aspect. In order to understand the establishment of a resting
potential one must realize that there are two factors operating
on this semipermeable membrane, the concentration gradient and the electrical gradient.
Since the intracellular concentration of K+ is greater than
the extracellular concentration, potassium is being driven by
a concentration gradient from the cell into the extracellular
space. Potassium ions travel through ion channels that are
not gated and are known as K+ leak channels. Because only
K+ ions are permitted through these channels an electrical
imbalance is established (more positive ions are present on
the extracellular aspect of the membrane than on the intracellular aspect). It should be understood that a K+ ion may
travel in either direction through the same K+ leak channel.
At the point where the concentration gradient’s “desire” to
push potassium out of the cell and the electrical imbalance’s
“desire” to return potassium into the cell equal each other, the
net flow of K+ ions becomes zero. This does not mean that
there is no flow of K+ ions across the membrane, it simply
means that the same number of K+ ions flow into the cell as
out of the cell. The establishment of this equilibrium potential
(modified for K+ ions) is described by the Nernst equation: 
where Vm is the membrane potential in volts; R is the gas constant; T is the temperature in °K; F is Faraday’s constant; Z is
the ion valence; and (ln[K+]out/[K+]in) is the natural logarithm
of the ratio of the cytoplasmic to extracellular concentration
of K+ ions.
The Nernst equation can be applied for all ions, and is
solved for the most common ions in Table 3.5. However, the
Nernst equation assumes that only the particular ion in question is permitted to traverse the cell membrane. However,
this is not a true situation as ion channels of the plasma
membrane, particularly of the neuron’s membrane, are open
simultaneously, thus permitting several ions to cross the
plasmalemma. This state of affairs is better described by the
Goldman equation.
The Goldman equation describes the membrane potential
as a function of the relative permeability of the cell membrane
to more than a single species of ions. Since the neuron
membrane is influenced by at least three ions, Na+, K+, and
Cl−, all three are considered in the Goldman equation: 
As is evident the Goldman equation is very similar to the
Nernst equation, but it predicts the membrane potential from
the concentration of several ions and the permeability of the
membrane to those ions. It is interesting to note that the two
equations would be identical if the permeability of two of the
three ions were zero. Therefore, the Goldman equation is
the Nernst equation expanded for multiple ions and consequently it calculates a more realistic resting membrane
potential for neurons.
The resting potential of a general neuron plasma membrane is approximately −71 mV when the ion concentrations
inside and outside the cell equal the values listed in Table 3.5.
The chloride ion concentration does not have much of an
effect on the resting potential, indicating that it is the K+
gradient that has the greatest role in establishing the resting
potential. The following mental exercise should help in
clarifying this statement. If we assume that originally the
potential difference across the membrane is zero but the
intracellular concentration of K+ is greater than on the outside, K+ will follow its concentration gradient and leave the
cell via the K+ leak channels. As these positive ions leave the
cell, the inside of the membrane will become more negative,
the outside of the membrane will become more positive, and
this electrical imbalance will begin to drive K+ back into the
cell. At the same time the concentration gradient will continue to drive K+ out of the cell and there will come a point
where the electric force and the concentration gradient force
will equal each other. It is at that point that the same number
of K+ ions will leave the cell as enter the cell and, therefore,
the net flow of K+ equals zero, thus establishing the resting
membrane potential. Simultaneously, Cl− ions will be unable
to enter the cell because the negative charges oppose their
inward movement, thus preventing Cl− ions from having
much of an influence on the resting membrane potential. A
further point to consider in this mental exercise is the number
of ions that have to be involved in the establishment of the
membrane potential. Since there are a far greater number of
ions inside the cell than just those in the immediate vicinity
(that is within 1–2 nm) of the cell membrane, the actual number of K+ ions that have to leave the cell per unit area of membrane is miniscule when compared to the concentration of K+
inside the cell.
A final point of interest is the effect of the Na+/K+ pump
on the resting membrane potential. It should be recalled that
this pump uses energy to move three Na+ ions out of the cell
into the extracellular space in exchange for two K+ ions that it
brings into the cell from the extracellular space. If the Na+/K+
pump is inactivated the membrane resting potential will
become somewhat less negative and if the pump remains
inactive for a longer period of time (a number of minutes), the
resting membrane potential becomes disturbed. However,
some time before that happens, cations, especially Na+, slowly
enter the cell and the intracellular Na+ concentration becomes
greater. As the concentration of Na+ increases, the ion concentration inside the cell will also increase, driving water into
the cell. Thus, the major function of the Na+/K+ pump in the
cell is the maintenance of the cell’s osmotic balance.
When the resting potential is disturbed at a particular
point, voltage-gated ion channels open and the passage of
specific ions through the membrane generates a small, localized electric current. If the current is the result of the inward
movement of cations (i.e., Na+), the resting potential is
decreased to such an extent that the polarity of the membrane
is reversed (depolarization). This local current is very small
and its ability to evoke an action potential diminishes:
• as a function of its distance from the initial segment of the
axon; and
• as a function of the time elapsed between the initiation of
the current and its arrival at the initial segment.
If the current is the result of the inward movement of
anions through a voltage-gated channel (i.e., Cl−) the resting
potential is increased (hyperpolarization), leading to an
increased resistance to depolarization (that is resistance to the
formation of an action potential).
Action potentials last only a
few milliseconds and occur
due to the influx of Na+ ions
into the neuron through
voltage-gated Na+ ion channels. These channels exist in
one of three configurations: closed, open, or refractory. When
the resting potential reaches a threshold level (about −55 mV),
the Na+ ion channel opens instantaneously (within 10 µs) and
remains open, permitting a rapid influx of Na+ ions. As the
number of Na+ ions increases at the cytoplasmic aspect of the
membrane, the accumulation of positive charges internally
(at the interface of the cytoplasm and the plasmalemma)
becomes greater than externally (at the interface of the
external aspect of the plasmalemma and the extracellular
space). Thus the inner aspect appears “more” positive than
the external aspect and the membrane is said to have become
depolarized (about +40 mV).
At this point we must revise our initial image of the
voltage-gated sodium channel. Instead of assuming a single
gate on the channel we must envision two gates. The first is the
activation gate (at the extracellular aspect of the membrane)
whereas the second is the inactivation gate (at the cytoplasmic aspect of the cell membrane), and both gates must be
open for Na+ ions to pass through the ion channel. At resting potential the activation gate is closed, the inactivation
gate is open, and Na+ ions cannot pass through. When the
threshold level (−55 mV) is reached the activation gate opens,
the inactivation gate remains open, and Na+ ions enter the
cell through the ion channel. As the positive charge on the
internal aspect builds up and the membrane is depolarized
(+40 mV), the inactivation gate slowly closes, and Na+ ions
can no longer pass through the Na+ ion channel. For 1–2 ms
thereafter the inactivation gate remains closed and the
Na+ ion channel cannot respond to alteration in the resting
potential. Thus, the Na+ ion channel is inactivated; it cannot be
opened, and the axon is said to be in the absolute refractory
period. Once the cell membrane is repolarized the activation
gate shuts, the inactivation gate slowly opens, and, although
Na+ ions still cannot pass through the Na+ ion channel, the
Na+ ion channel once again can respond to alterations in the
resting potential.
In response to the sodium influx-induced depolarization
of the membrane, voltage-gated K+ ion channels slowly open
and remain open for a longer period of time than do Na+ ion
channels. It should be noted that voltage-gate K+ channels are
different from K+-leak channels. They open only during
depolarization, whereas K+-leak channels are always open.
The increased positive charge (due to the influx of Na+ ions)
on the internal aspect of the membrane drives K+ ions out to
the external aspect of the cell membrane. This efflux of K+
ions is so intense that it hyperpolarizes the membrane, making the initiation of a second depolarization more arduous,
until the resting membrane potential is re-established. This
period of time is known as the relative refractory period and
contributes to the total refractory period.
An action potential is a local
event involving a short segment of an axon and it lasts
merely a few milliseconds. In
order to utilize action potentials for the transmission of
information they must be able to advance along the axon in a
single direction, until they reach the axon terminal.
The following points recap the previous discussion of
events occurring at a voltage-gated Na+ ion channel:
1 The influx of Na+ ions reversed the polarity of the membrane at that particular point.
2 The positive ions flowed away from the original site of
entry, dispersing both toward the soma and toward the
axon terminal.
3 As the positive charges reached the neighboring Na+ ion
channel (located closer to the axon terminal), the resting
membrane potential was disrupted, that is the internal
aspect of the axon membrane became more positive due
to the presence of excess Na+ ions.
4 Once the threshold level was reached the Na+ ion channel
opened permitting the entry of more Na+ ions, resulting
in the depolarization of the membrane at the new point
and a new action potential was generated.
5 In this fashion the action potential is constantly regenerated (and propagated) at sequential Na+ ion channels until
the wave of depolarization reaches the axon terminal.
6 Remembering the discussion concerning the refractory
period, it should be clear that those Na+ ions that entered
at the Na+ ion channel and dispersed toward the soma
encountered Na+ ion channels that were still inactivated,
and their inactivation gates could not be opened.
7 Since the inactivation gate remained closed Na+ ions
could not pass through the Na+ ion channel and the membrane could not be depolarized at the old point.
8 Therefore, the action potential in a normal in vivo situation
can travel only in a single direction, away from the soma
toward the axon terminal.
The conduction velocity of an action potential is directly
dependent on the diameter of the axon. The conduction
velocity is further increased due to axon myelination
(Fig. 3.12). As indicated above, in an unmyelinated axon the
propagation of the action potential is dependent on the
sequential activation of successive Na+ ion channels. In a
myelinated axon voltage-gated Na+ ion channels are much
farther apart, located only at the nodes of Ranvier, requiring
that the generation of action potentials occurs only at the
nodes. Hence, the current must “jump” from node to node
(saltatory conduction), a much faster process than that occurring in unmyelinated axons.
Small local currents, initiated
by the release of chemical
messengers from synaptic
vesicles are spread throughout the cell body of the
neuron, and are known as
postsynaptic potentials (PSPs). As mentioned earlier, the
ability of these postsynaptic potentials to evoke an action
potential diminishes as a function of:
• their distance from the initial segment of the axon; and
• the amount of time that has elapsed from the time the
depolarization occurred at the initial segment of the
axon.
The reason for this is that the dendrites and soma have relatively few voltage-gated channels—a specific requirement
for the formation and propagation of action potentials. An
increase in the number of postsynaptic potentials (e.g., by the
rapid release of multiple quanta of chemical messengers
from a single axon terminal or from many axon terminals
on the same neuron), however, results in their summation.
Hence, hundreds of nearly simultaneous, small postsynaptic
potentials may be necessary to achieve the threshold required
for the formation of an action potential when those currents
arrive at the initial segment of the axon.
Generally, inhibitory synapses are closer to the initial
segment of the axon than are excitatory synapses. Since
inhibitory synapses function to hyperpolarize the postsynaptic membrane, they tend to diminish the flow of currents
formed at the excitatory potential making it more difficult to
reach threshold levels at the initial segment of the axon. This
sequence of events is referred to as the summation of IPSPs
and EPSPs (inhibitory postsynaptic potentials and excitatory
postsynaptic potentials).
Leigh’s syndrome (subacute encephalomyelopathy), a childhood disease, is
due to mutations in the mitochondrial DNA as well as mutations in chromosome 9 (surfeit-1 gene) of neurons located in the basal ganglia. Children
afflicted with this disease initially lose their verbal abilities and muscular
coordination, and later may exhibit dementia, seizures, and optic atrophy;
many die due to respiratory failure.
Tay–Sachs disease is an inherited lysosomal storage disease where
specific neurons are unable to synthesize the enzyme hexosaminidase A. These
defective lysosomes are unable to digest sphingolipids, which continue to
accumulate and impede the normal functioning of the cell, leading to cell
death. This autosomal recessive trait is especially prominent in families of
Eastern European Jewish descent. Its symptoms—hyperacusis, irritability,
hypotonia, reduced motor skills, blindness with red spots in the macula, and
seizures—appear before the first year of life and result in the death of the child
between the second and fourth year of age.
Multiple sclerosis is characterized by progressive demyelination of the
white matter in the brain and spinal cord. This condition, believed to be an
autoimmune disease, usually appears in the young adult and is distinguished
by periods of deterioration followed by periods of remission that may continue
for decades. As the disease progresses the periods of remission become shorter
and the disability becomes greater due, among other things, to the decreased
velocity of impulse propagation in the affected axons. Any one of the demyelination episodes may lead to death within a short period of time.
Neuroglial tumors account for approximately half of intracranial tumors.
They range in severity from the relatively mild oligodendroglioma to the
highly malignant, and fatal, glioblastoma. The latter disease originates from
very rapidly proliferating astrocyte-derived neoplastic cells that invade the
cerebrum.
The patient underwent an MRI
examination of the brain and CSF
examination that confirm he has multiple
sclerosis (MS). MS is a neurologic disease
that can vary widely in symptomatology,
since it can cause lesions in any part of the
CNS. However, it only affects the white
matter. More specifically, prototypical
MS causes demyelination of axons in the
CNS by death or injury to oligodendrocytes. In most cases there is relative
preservation of the axons. The understanding of the pathophysiology is
incomplete, but it is clear that there is
an immunologic attack causing loss of
or dysfunction of oligodendrocytes.
However, it is not a typical autoimmune
condition since most of the medications
used for autoimmune diseases such
as rheumatoid arthritis do not work
(or do not work well).
The diagnosis can be confirmed by
MRI of the appropriate area of the CNS.
The patient in the case study had multiple
demyelinating plaques in the cerebellum
and brain, including the corpus callosum
(which is characteristic). The lesions of
MS are often periventricular in location.
There are often lesions seen that are
clinically “silent.” Using CSF and serum
electrophoresis, synthesis of antibodies
within the CNS and not the serum is often
demonstrated. This is pathologic.
One definition for MS is that it causes
multiple lesions in the CNS in space and
time. Multiple focal white matter plaques
of demyelination, easily seen by MRI,
are present in different parts of the brain,
brainstem, and/or spinal cord at different
times. Peripheral nerve myelin is not
affected at all since it is produced
differently. The most common syndrome
is a relapsing/remitting course. Over
the course of many years symptoms
occur in episodes lasting typically
weeks or months, and then symptoms
spontaneously improve. Over the course
of years, after a number of relapses, this
can lead to disability.
Common symptoms of relapses
include, but are certainly not limited to,
focal numbness/tingling or weakness,
gait ataxia, visual loss (optic neuritis),
slurred speech, paraplegia and sensory
disturbance up to a thoracic dermatome
level, and ocular motility problems (producing double vision). One characteristic
of MS is that heat or a rise in body
temperature can temporarily bring about
symptoms typical of that particular
patient’s MS. This is not due to any
new lesions happening within the CNS.
A rise in temperature actually reduces
the efficiency of conduction along axons.
The effects are not seen in people with
normal CNS function because there is a
large reserve capacity for conduction,
but this is not so in the old plaques of
demyelination in patients with MS. It is
common for MS patients to complain of
symptoms surfacing temporarily with
fevers, hot baths or showers, prolonged
exertion, or sunbathing.
A 60-year-old man presents to
your office with imbalance and a
few falls. He has had some severe bumps
and bruises from the falls, which
prompted him to come in to see the doctor. Symptoms seemed to begin about 6
months previously, and are slowly getting worse. Also noted is a tremor that
primarily involves the right hand, and is
most prominent when at rest and when
walking. In fact, the patient barely notices
it but it is very bothersome to his wife. His
movements, according to his wife, seem
very slow and stiff.
The patient does not make good eye
contact when being spoken to, and gaze
is directed downward. Facial expression
is limited, and there seems to be a
paucity of spontaneous movements.
All movements, including walking,
speaking, reaching, etc., are very slow
but performed accurately. There is a
tremor, most prominent in the right hand,
which is most noticeable at rest and goes
away when reaching for objects. It is also
enhanced when walking, and writing
is poor. Walking is slow with short,
shuffling steps.
Cells of the nervous system communicate with each other
at synapses either via electrical signals or by the release of
relatively small messenger molecules. The morphology and
physiology of electrical and chemical synapses were presented in Chapter 3, whereas the current chapter discusses
the most common and significant of the neurotransmitter
substances (of which there are more than 100) (Table 4.1).
These messenger molecules may be classified into two major
types, those that bind directly to ion channels (ligand-gated
receptors) and those that bind to G-protein-coupled receptors. The neurotransmitter substances that bind specifically
to ligand-gated ion channels cause those channels to open
directly, thus the target neuron responds immediately,
resulting in an ionotropic effect (Fig. 4.1). Those neurotransmitter substances that bind to G-protein-coupled receptors
exert an indirect effect on ion channels. Since the G-proteins
act as intermediaries, the effect on the target neuron is slower
than in the previous instance. Thus, these neurotransmitter
substances are frequently known as neuromodulators, and
they are said to exert a metabotropic effect (Fig. 4.2).
In order for a substance to be considered a neurotransmitter (or neuromodulator) it must possess five basic characteristics: (i) they must be synthesized by presynaptic neurons;
(ii) they have to reside within the synaptic terminals (enclosed
in synaptic vesicles); (iii) they are released from the presynaptic terminals by way of a calcium-dependent mechanism;
(iv) they have to bind to specific receptors on the postsynaptic
membrane; and (v) they must be inactivated in the synaptic
cleft. Each neuron has at least one, but usually a number of
neurotransmitter substances—co-transmitters—in its presynaptic terminal (frequently a classic neurotransmitter
as well as neuropeptides). These co-transmitters may be
released individually or together, and they are usually housed
in different synaptic vesicles. It is interesting to note that the
“classic” neurotransmitters (e.g., acetylcholine and monoamines) are stored in small, electron-lucent synaptic vesicles,
whereas neuropeptides are stored in somewhat larger,
dense-cored secretory granules.
Neurotransmitter substances may be classified into four
different groups: biogenic amines, neuropeptides, small
molecule neurotransmitters, and other ligands.
Biogenic amines, amino
acid derivatives, bind to
G-protein-coupled receptors
and activate the second
messenger system within the target neuron, which in turn
will open ion channels. Biogenic amines include dopamine,
norepinephrine, and epinephrine (all considered under the
heading catecholamines), and histamine and serotonin.
Upon release from the presynaptic terminal, biogenic amines
are endocytosed by the nerve terminals and glial cells, and
are digested by the enzymes cathecol O-methyltranferase
and monoamine oxidase (MAO). In this fashion, each release
of these neurotransmitters is responsible for only a limited
number of depolarizations/hyperpolarizations. Monoamine
oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) are drugs that act within
the presynaptic neuron to inactivate catecholamines and
indoleamines. They also act to increase the concentration of
other neurotransmitters such as serotonin, dopamine, and
norepinephrine, and, by some unknown mechanism, relieve
depression.
The three major catecholamines, dopamine, norepinephrine,
and epinephrine, have similar characteristics. They are all
derivatives of the amino acid tyrosine, they have a catechol
component, and the enzyme tyrosine hydroxylase participates in the conversion of tyrosine to dihydroxyphenylalanine
(l-DOPA) (Fig. 4.3).
Dopamine is an excitatory neurotransmitter present in
neurons of various regions of the central nervous system
(CNS). They include the neurons of the arcuate nucleus, a
group of nerve cell bodies that project to the infundibulum of
the hypophysis, the neurons of the ventral tegmentum whose
axons project to the limbic system, and the neurons of the
substantia nigra whose axons project to the striatum.
Norepinephrine (noradrenaline), an excitatory neurotransmitter located in postganglionic sympathetic neurons, is
derived from dopamine. The conversion occurs in the presynaptic terminals of adrenergic neurons and is facilitated
by the enzyme dopamine β-hydroxylase. An additional site
where norepinephrine is the neurotransmitter is the locus
ceruleus. Neurons of the locus ceruleus project to the reticular formation as well as to various other regions of the CNS.
Higher than normal levels of norepinephrine in the CNS
have been associated with mania, whereas lower than normal
levels have been associated with depression. Additionally,
panic disorders have also been associated with abnormal
levels of norepinephrine in the CNS.
Epinephrine (adrenaline) is an excitatory neurotransmitter
derived from norepinephrine. The conversion is catalyzed
by the enzyme phenylethanolamine-N-methyltransferase.
Very few neurons of the CNS use epinephrine as a neurotransmitter substance, and those that do are restricted to the
rostral medulla oblongata.
Serotonin is a derivative of tryptophan, an amino acid
that is converted into 5-hydroxytryptophan by the ratelimiting enzyme tryptophan-5-hydroxylase. Decarboxylation of 5-hydroxytryptophan results in the formation of
5-hydroxytryptamine, serotonin, which is an excitatory
neurotransmitter (Fig. 4.4). Neurons that use serotonin as
their neurotransmitter substance are known as serotonergic
neurons, and they are present in the pons, medulla, raphe
nuclei of the midbrain, and pineal body. These neurons function in arousal and sleep modulation as well as in regulating
certain higher cognitive functions. Moreover these neurons
may exert modulatory effects on cathecolamine levels.
Histamine is an inflammatory pharmacologic agent released
by mast cells and basophils. It is responsible for causing capillaries to become leaky and also for contraction of bronchiolar
smooth muscles. In the nervous system it is located mostly
in the hypophysis and the median eminence of the hypothalamus. It appears that histamine may affect emotion,
memory, and learning, through H1 receptors.
Initially, many of the neuropeptides were known as
hormones in the digestive
and respiratory systems,
but subsequently they were
observed to function also as
neurotransmitters in the nervous system. Neuropeptides are small polypeptides, cleaved,
post-translationally before they reach the Golgi apparatus,
from larger propeptide molecules synthesized on the rough
endoplasmic reticulum (RER) in the soma. The cleaved neuropeptides are packaged into secretory vesicles in the transGolgi network and transferred, via the rapid anterograde
transport, to the presynaptic terminal. Often, a presynaptic
terminal may possess and release a number of different
neuropeptides simultaneously, but once released, instead of
being recycled, they are destroyed by peptidases. Thus, a
single release of a quantum of neuropeptides cannot elicit
multiple responses from the postsynaptic cell. Depending on
the specific neuropeptides and/or their receptors, these small
peptides may be excitatory or inhibitory neurotransmitters or
neuromodulators. Although there are numerous neuropeptides, only the most common ones will be detailed in this
textbook, namely somatostatin, substance P, and the opioid
neuropeptides, endorphins, enkephalins, and dynorphins.
Somatostatin (also known as somatotropin release-inhibiting
factor) was first observed in the digestive tract as one of the
paracrine hormones manufactured and released by one of the
diffuse neuroendocrine system (DNES) cells. It was noted
to function in inhibiting the release of other paracrine and
endocrine hormones manufactured by nearby DNES cells.
Somatostatin, in the CNS, is an inhibitory neurotransmitter
and is localized in the hypothalamus, amygdala, and the
small spinal ganglion cells.
Substance P is a small polypeptide, composed of 11 amino
acids, that was first discovered in the digestive system as a
product of the DNES cells. Subsequently, it was observed in
the spinal cord, hippocampus, and the neocortex, as well as
in the unipolar neurons of the trigeminal ganglia and dorsal
root ganglia. Substance P is an excitatory neuropeptide
that is one of the most important neurotransmitters in
nociception.
The opioid neuropeptides constitute a major subgroup of
neuropeptides, composed of at least 20 neurotransmitter
substances. Although they may be subdivided into three
categories—enkephalins, endorphins, and dynorphins—
they have three major characteristics in common in that
they are mostly inhibitory, they bind to opium receptors of
the postsynaptic membrane, and they serve as substance P
agonists, inducing analgesia.
Enkephalins are of two types, methionine enkephalins
(met-enkephalins) and leucine enkephalins (leu-enkephalins).
Met-enkephalins are derived from proenkephalin and proopiomelanocortin (POMC), a large propeptide precursor
that is cleaved to form the following: beta endorphins,
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), beta lipoprotein, and
melanocyte-stimulating hormone (Fig. 4.5). Leu-enkephalin
is a derivative of the propeptides prodynorphin and
proenkephalin. Enkephalins are the neurotransmitter substances used by many interneurons as well as at synapses
in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. Enkephalins are also
used as neurotransmitters in the limbic system, the cerebral
cortex, in the striatum, and in the raphe nuclei of the
brainstem.
The most common form of the endorphins are beta endorphins, also POMC derivatives. They are present in the
hypothalamus where they exert an analgesic effect. As with
most other opioid neuropeptides, beta endorphins are
inhibitory neurotransmitter substances.
Dynorphin is an inhibitory neurotransmitter substance
derived from the propeptide prodynorphin. This neurotransmitter substance is inhibitory, and functions in pain
suppression. Dynorphin is localized in the amygdala, limbic
system, and in the hypothalamus.
Small molecule neurotransmitters, such as acetylcholine, glycine, glutamate,
and gamma aminobutyric
acid (GABA), are low weight
substances that are usually synthesized in the presynaptic
terminals. The enzymes required for their synthesis are
translated in the soma and reach the presynaptic terminals
via anterograde axonal transport.
Acetylcholine, a neurotransmitter substance localized both
in the central and peripheral nervous systems, is synthesized
in the presynaptic terminal from acetyl coenzyme A (CoA)
and choline by choline acetyltransferase, the rate-limiting
enzyme of its synthesis (Fig. 4.6). Acetylcholine, as with
many other neurotransmitters, has the ability to bind to both
ionotropic receptors and metabotropic receptors. In skeletal
muscle it is an excitatory neurotransmitter substance,
binding directly to ligand-gated sodium (nicotinic receptors)
as well as to potassium ion channels and causing them to
open. In cardiac muscle it is an inhibitory neurotransmitter
substance, binding to G-protein-linked receptors (muscarinic receptors) that facilitate the opening of potassium ion
channels.
Acetylcholine is also present in the autonomic nervous system, specifically at the preganglionic sympathetic,
preganglionic parasympathetic, and postganglionic parasympathetic synapses, as well as in localized areas of the
CNS such as the projection neurons of the tegmentum,
interneurons of the striatum, projection neurons of the
forebrain, and motoneurons of the brainstem and spinal
cord.
The enzyme acetylcholinesterase is present in the synaptic cleft at the postsynaptic membrane. This enzyne cleaves
the released acetylcholine into its two component molecules,
choline and acetyl CoA, preventing multiple depolarizations
from the release of a single quantum of acetylcholine. The
cleaved moieties, acetyl CoA and choline, are transported,
individually, into the presynaptic terminal where they are
reassembled into acetylcholine and stored in synaptic
vesicles.
Glycine, one of the most common inhibitory neurotransmitters of the spinal cord, is synthesized by the enzyme
serine hydroxymethyl transferase from the amino acid
serine (Fig. 4.7A). Usually, glycine binds to ligand-gated
chloride channels. Subsequent to its release into the synaptic
cleft, glycine is recaptured by glycine-specific, membranebound carrier proteins (transport proteins) ferried into the
presynaptic terminal and is transported into synaptic vesicles
for future use.
Glutamate, probably the most common excitatory neurotransmitter, is synthesized in the presynaptic terminal from
glutamine, catalyzed by the enzyme glutaminase. Once
glutamate is released into the synaptic cleft within the CNS,
it must be quickly removed, or it will cause the postsynaptic
neuron to undergo repeated excitations, resulting in neuronal degeneration and subsequent death. This process,
known as excitotoxicity, results from repeated stimulation
of the postsynaptic membrane receptors that open Ca2+
channels. The increased influx of Ca2+ into the soma results
in free radical formation and damage to the neuron and its
membranes.
To prevent excitotoxicity, the free glutamate in the vicinity
of the synapse is endocytosed by the presynaptic terminal as
well as by local glia cells. The glutamate endocytosed by the
presynaptic terminal is converted, by the enzyme glutamine
synthetase, to glutamine, which then is converted to form
glutamate. The same reaction occurs within the glia cells;
however, these cells release the newly formed glutamine
into the vicinity of the presynaptic terminal that endocytoses
the glutamine and, as before, converts it into glutamate
(Fig. 4.8). This entire sequence is known as the glutamine–
glutamate cycle.
Approximately 30% of the neurons of the CNS use gamma
aminobutyric acid (GABA) as an inhibitory neurotransmitter substance. GABA is derived from glucose by way of glutamate, whose conversion to GABA is catalyzed by the enzyme
glutamic acid decarboxylase, utilizing pyridoxal phosphate
(a vitamin B6 derivative) as a cofactor (Fig. 4.7B). Once
GABA is released from the presynaptic terminal, the free
neurotransmitter molecules (those not bound to postsynaptic
receptors) are rapidly reabsorbed by neuroglia and the presynaptic terminals by using GABA-specific membranebound protein transporters.
GABA is present in local circuit interneurons and Purkinje
cells of the cerebellum. Depending on the receptor, the binding of GABA either opens chloride or potassium ion channels
or closes calcium ion channels.
Although there is a plethora of other neurotransmitter and
neuromodulator substances, many of them are sufficiently
rare in the nervous system that they will not be addressed in
this textbook. Only adenosine triphosphate and nitric oxide
will be discussed.
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) is a high energy phosphate
molecule that is customarily associated with energy storage
in cells. Not much is understood concerning its functions as a
neurotransmitter substance, but it is known to be co-released
with other neurotransmitters and it has an excitatory effect. It
is present in autonomic postganglionic neurons as well as in
motoneurons of the spinal cord.
Nitric oxide (NO) is a gas, derived from the amino acid
L-arginine by the action of the enzyme nitric oxide synthase.
It is a very reactive molecule and, therefore, has a very
short half-life. This inhibitory neurotransmitter is unusual
not only because it is a gas but also due to the fact that it
does not bind to membrane receptors. It may function in
memory formation since it is located in the hippocampal
formation. Additionally, NO is also present in the olfactory
system, the cerebellum, striatum, cerebral cortex, and the
hypothalamus.
Parkinsonism is a neurologic disorder characterized by progressive deterioration with time. The chief symptoms are rigidity of movement, increased
tremors and trembling, being slow in initiating movement, muscle stiffness,
stooping gait, and difficulties in maintaining balance. This disease is the result
of the degeneration and death of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia
nigra, which causes a decrease in the availability of the neurotransmitter
substance dopamine. The reason for the degeneration of the dopaminergic
neurons is not understood. It is interesting to note that excess levels of
dopamine in the ventral tegmentum has been associated with schizophrenia.
Eaton–Lambert syndrome is an autoimmune disorder affecting mostly men
older than 50 years of age, many of whom are long-time smokers who are also
suffering from small cell lung carcinoma. The symptoms of this syndrome
include weakness of the axial and limb muscles. Additional symptoms include
xerostomia (dry mouth), impaired accommodation of the eyes, impotence, and
the inability to elicit deep tendon reflexes. Since some of these symptoms also
appear in myasthenia gravis, the two conditions resemble one another.
However, in the Eaton–Lambert syndrome the ocular and bulbar muscles are
rarely affected, whereas ocular paresis is normally present in myasthenia.
The two diseases affect different regions of the myoneural junction. In the
Eaton–Lambert syndrome, the autoimmune response is against the calcium
ion channels of the presynaptic membrane, interfering with the flow of calcium
ions into the presynaptic terminal. The diminished number of calcium ions
prevents the adherence of the normal number of synaptic vesicles to the
presynaptic membrane, decreasing the release of acetylcholine with each
stimulus, and resulting in a weak muscle contraction.
In myasthenia gravis, the autoimmune reaction is against the acetylcholine
receptors of the postsynaptic membrane. Therefore, even though the release of
acetylcholine from the presynaptic membrane is normal, the reduced
number of normal acetylcholine receptors of the postsynaptic membrane
results in weak muscle contraction. The muscles of the head, and especially of
the eye, are the first ones to be affected, but as the disease progresses the
respiratory muscles also become involved and the patient dies of respiratory
insufficiency.
Alpha latrotoxin, the venom of the black widow spider, is inserted into the
presynaptic membrane of the myoneural junction, where it acts as an ungated,
nonselective ion channel, permitting the entry of Na+, K+, and Ca2+ into the
presynaptic terminal. The altered intracellular univalent cation concentration
results in constant depolarization of the presynaptic terminal. Moreover, the
elevated Ca2+ levels facilitate synaptic vesicle docking and the release of
copious amount of acetylcholine into the synaptic cleft. The continuous release
of acetylcholine initially results in muscle rigidity and then in paralysis of
the affected muscles.
Huntington’s disease is a genetic disorder resulting in degeneration of
GABAergic neurons in the caudate nucleus and putamen. The reduction in
GABA results in increased release of dopamine and a corresponding decrease
in acetylcholine release in the striatum, causing an imbalance in the ratio of
these two neurotransmitter substances. It is this imbalance that is responsible
for the symptoms of Huntington’s disease, whose early signs include the
incapacity to form new memory, the inability to make decisions, memory
loss, depression, irritability, and mood swings. As the disease progresses,
the patient becomes emotionally disturbed, loses cognitive faculties, and will
display uncontrolled, erratic movements (Huntington’s chorea).
The diagnosis is Parkinson’s
disease, which is very common
and usually easy to diagnose. It is a
purely clinical diagnosis. All testing is
either normal or unrevealing.
This patient was given levodopa three
times a day. His symptoms improved
dramatically within a half hour of when
he took his first dose. He noted that symptoms were bad in the mornings before he
took his morning dose of medicine. The
patient and his wife both stated that he
seemed “normal” with the medicine.
Parkinson’s disease is the most
common of the class of diseases known
as movement disorders. Movement
disorders are caused by pathology
somewhere within the basal ganglia.
In the case of Parkinson’s disease, there
is a degeneration of neurons in the
midbrain’s substantia nigra, which is
composed of pigmented cells. Dopamine
is the neurotransmitter released by these
neurons, to communicate with other
components of the basal ganglia. In
Parkinson’s disease there is a relative lack
of dopamine in the basal ganglia due to
the degeneration of neurons that
synthesize it. Levodopa is a precursor to
dopamine. It is taken up by the remaining
substantia nigra neurons, is converted to
dopamine, and the relative deficiency
of dopamine in the basal ganglia is
temporarily corrected. Dopamine cannot
be used as a medicine since it will not
cross the blood–brain barrier and get into
the brain.
Medications that contain levodopa
are very effective treatments for the
symptoms of Parkinson’s disease. They
relieve symptoms very quickly, but
the effects typically wear off in a few
hours. Dopamine agonists are used in
Parkinson’s disease, and anticholinergic
medicines are also sometimes used.
However, none of these medicines alters
the underlying pathology of the disease.
They only reduce symptoms.
A 45-year-old white female
complains of back pain, and weakness and numbness of both legs. The back
pain started about a month ago and the
other symptoms began 1 week ago as
slight imbalance, tingling feet, and
“funny” sensations around her abdomen.
This has rapidly progressed to the point
where she can no longer walk by herself,
she burned her leg in the bathtub because
she could not feel that the water was too
hot, and today she had an episode of
urinary incontinence. Sensation seems
reduced or altered from her toes all the
way up to her chest. The weakness and
numbness are in both legs but worse on
the left. The arms are normal. Her back
pain is in the middle of her back, over
the spine, as opposed to the much more
common lower back pain.
Exam shows moderate to severe
weakness in both legs, which is worse
on the right. Arm strength is normal.
Pinprick sensation and touch are reduced
bilaterally in the legs and abdomen, up
to a fairly distinct level at the nipple line.
Percussion of the back shows tenderness
over the spine in the upper thoracic
region. Reflexes at the knees and ankles
are pathologically brisk, and Babinski
responses are present bilaterally. Reflexes
in the arms are normal. The patient
cannot walk without assistance.
The spinal cord, the grayish-white oblong cylindrical continuation of the medulla oblongata of the brain, begins at
the foramen magnum of the skull and extends within the
vertebral canal to terminate as the cone-shaped conus
medullaris. In the adult the caudal tip of the conus
medullaris is located between vertebral levels L1 and L2.
Thus, the adult spinal cord is approximately 45 cm in length
with an average diameter of 1–1.5 cm and an average weight
of about 30 g.
The spinal cord is a soft, gelatinous substance that is
protected from injury by being encased in the bony spinal
column. Additional protection is provided by the meninges, composed of the three concentric sheaths: the dura
matter, arachnoid, and pia mater. There is only a potential
space between the outermost dura and the arachnoid, known
as the subdural space, but the subarachnoid space, located
between the arachnoid and pia, is filled with cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF). The meninges surround the entire spinal cord and,
in turn, are enveloped by epidural fat and a venous plexus.
Along its length, the lateral aspect of the spinal cord is
affixed by about 21 pairs of denticulate ligaments (triangular
extensions of the pia) to the dura mater. The spinal cord is
a two-way conduit to and from the brain. It functions as a
central relay station, receiving incoming information from
the body and the brain, and as a central processing station, conveying outgoing information to the body and the brain.
The circumference of the
spinal cord varies along its
length. It presents two
regions of thickening—the
cervical enlargement (C3 to
T2) and the lumbar enlargement (L1 to S3)—the origins
of the spinal nerves destined for the upper and lower limbs,
respectively. Each spinal nerve emanates from the spinal
cord as dorsal and ventral rootlets, which eventually join
within the intervertebral foramen to form that particular
spinal nerve.
The spinal cord equals the length of the vertebral canal
only until the end of the first trimester of prenatal life.
Thereafter the trunk elongates much faster, so that by the
time of birth the conus medullaris is only at the level of the
third lumbar vertebra and in the adult it extends only as far
as the caudal aspect of the first lumbar vertebra. Therefore,
lower levels of the spinal cord segments are displaced rostrally in relation to their corresponding vertebral levels
(Table 5.1). Because of this differential growth, the subarachnoid space caudal to the conus medullaris, known as
the lumbar cistern, is devoid of spinal cord (Fig. 5.1).
As the dorsal and ventral rootlets of the lumbar and sacral
segments elongate, they descend various distances and form
a loose conglomeration of nerve fibers within the lumbar cistern. Since these fibers resemble a horse’s tail, they are known
as the cauda equina. Moreover, the pial covering of the spinal
cord continues beyond the conus medullaris as a thin, non-nervous filament, the filum terminale, to the 2nd sacral vertebra where it is covered by the continuation of the dura and
arachnoid and is anchored into the 1st coccygeal vertebral
segment. The CSF, by filling the subarachnoid space, surrounds, suspends, and thus further protects, the spinal cord
from possible mechanical injury.
Since the spinal cord of the adult occupies only the upper
two-thirds of the spinal column, the lumbar cistern is a CSFfilled chamber that is accessible for spinal taps, avoiding
damage to the spinal cord (Fig. 5.2). The CSF-filled central
canal of the spinal cord is continuous rostrally with the
fourth ventricle of the brain and extends along the entire
length of the cord, terminating within the filum terminale
in the young adult and just rostral to the conus medullaris
by the fourth decade of life. Frequently the central canal is
partially occluded by ependymal cells.
The spinal cord possesses
a bilateral symmetry, and
the ordered presence of the
anterior median fissure and
the posterior median sulcus
aid in the recognition of this symmetry. The ventral (anterior) median fissure is about 3 mm deep and extends along
the entire anterior (ventral) length of the spinal cord. The dorsal (posterior) median sulcus is not as deep as its anterior
counterpart, but it also occupies the entire posterior (dorsal)
length of the spinal cord. It is interesting to note that a glial
septum, the dorsal (posterior) median septum, is continuous
with the deep aspect of the posterior median sulcus, and
assists in separating the spinal cord into the right and left
halves (Fig. 5.3).
Approximately 2 mm on either side of the dorsal median
sulcus is the dorsolateral (posterolateral) sulcus, distinguished by the presence of the dorsal rootlets of the spinal
nerves as they penetrate the substance of the spinal cord,
that extends the entire length of the spinal cord. The dorsointermediate sulcus, located between the posterior median and
posterolateral sulci, is present only at the cervical and upper
thoracic levels. The ventral rootlets of the spinal nerves
emerge at the ventrolateral (anterolateral) sulcus, between
the posterolateral sulcus and the anterior median fissure.
The segmental design of the
spinal cord is displayed by
the presence of 31 pairs of
spinal nerves and their associated dorsal root ganglia. Each spinal nerve emanates from
the spinal cord as a number of sensory and motor rootlets,
leaving the spinal cord’s dorsal and ventral surfaces, respectively. Each rootlet is composed of processes of a large number
of neurons.
The ventral rootlets, usually no more than eight in number, are seen to join to form a single ventral root, housing the
axons of motor (and in certain regions, sympathetic) neurons.
The dorsal rootlets, also no more than eight in number, join
and enter the slight swelling, known as the dorsal root ganglion housing the unipolar nerve cell bodies. These dorsal
rootlets thus contain the central processes of these unipolar
cells. The peripheral processes of the unipolar cells, which
bring sensory information from sensory receptors distributed throughout the body, leave the dorsal root ganglion to
join the ventral root of the same segment to form the mixed
spinal nerve, which thus contains both sensory and motor
fibers.
Each spinal nerve leaves the vertebral column via its intervertebral foramen and is named accordingly. The first eight
spinal nerves, C1–C8, exit the vertebral canal abovethe correspondingly numbered cervical vertebrae, whereas all subsequent spinal nerves (T1–T12, L1–L5, S1–S5, and Co1) exit
below the correspondingly named vertebrae (Fig. 5.4). Hence
there are 31 pairs of spinal nerves emerging from the spinal
cord. The region of the spinal cord associated with a particular pair of spinal nerves is called a spinal segment.
Spinal nerves are only a few millimeters in length. They
give rise to a slender recurrent meningeal branch and then
branch into two components, a smaller dorsal primary ramus
and a larger ventral primary ramus. Every ventral primary
ramus receives a gray ramus communicans from its corresponding sympathetic chain ganglion. Additionally, each
ventral primary ramus from T1 through L2,3 also provides a
white ramus communicans to its corresponding sympathetic
chain ganglion (Fig. 5.5). These connecting branches carry
postganglionic and preganglionic sympathetic fibers from
and to the sympathetic chain ganglia, respectively. White
rami communicantes have myelinated fibers, whereas gray
rami communicantes house nonmyelinated fibers. Additionally, ventral primary rami S1–S3 also provide spinal
preganglionic parasympathetic fibers that pass directly to
their site of destination.
Sensory innervation of the skin is determined by its developmental origin, and the strip of skin for which a particular
spinal nerve is responsible is referred to as a dermatome.
Along the length of the trunk, each dermatome forms an
ordered series of bands, whereas along the limbs the ordering
is not as evident. These bands overlap each other, since the
sensory nerves of one dermatome are also responsible for
innervating regions of adjacent dermatomes (Fig. 5.6). It is
interesting to note that the overlap is greater for light touch
than for pain. Clinicians should remember the distribution
of certain dermatomes (Table 5.2). Additionally, all of the
muscle cells that are innervated by the fibers of a particular
spinal nerve are referred to as a myotome. Furthermore, a
sclerotome is defined as the ligaments and bones that receive
their innervation from the fibers of the same spinal nerve.
Neurons are classified by
function into three categories: sensory (afferent),
intercalated (connecting),
and motor (efferent). The
afferent and efferent components are further categorized
into more specific divisions, namely somatic and visceral.
Thus, a typical spinal nerve has four functional components,
known as modalities: the general somatic afferent (GSA),
general visceral afferent (GVA), general somatic efferent
(GSE), and general visceral efferent (GVE) components. Cell
bodies of the afferent fibers of a spinal nerve reside in the
dorsal root ganglia, whereas the cell bodies of the efferent
fibers are located within the gray matter of the spinal cord.
Visceral efferent neurons belong to the autonomic
nervous system and they may be part of its sympathetic or
parasympathetic component. The cell bodies of the preganglionic sympathetic visceral efferent fibers are located in the
lateral gray column of the T1 through L2,3 levels of the spinal
cord. The cell bodies of the preganglionic parasympathetic
visceral efferent fibers are located in the lateral gray column
of sacral spinal levels 2–4. The cell bodies of visceral afferent
neurons are located in the dorsal root ganglia. Their peripheral processes bring information from the viscera, using
white rami communicantes to enter the spinal nerve. The
central process of the visceral afferent neuron uses the
dorsal rootlets to enter the substance of the spinal cord. Once
there it will either complete a reflex path by synapsing with
sympathetic or somatic efferent neurons, usually by way of
an interneuron, or will synapse with other neurons in the
spinal cord or brainstem to deliver the information to higher
centers.
General somatic afferent is sensory information, such as
touch, pressure, pain, temperature, and proprioception, that
is perceived in the body and is transmitted to the spinal cord.
General visceral afferent is sensory information that is perceived in the viscera—the organs, glands, and membranes—
that is transmitted to the spinal cord. The general somatic
efferent fibers provide motor innervation to skeletal muscles
of somatic origin. The general visceral efferent fibers provide motor innervation to the glands, cardiac muscle, and
smooth muscle.
The nerve fibers constituting
the spinal nerve are subdivided into two categories,
afferent (sensory) and efferent (motor). All afferent
fibers enter the spinal cord via the dorsal rootlets and all
efferent fibers leave the spinal cord via the ventral rootlets.
Afferent fibers are classified according to their peak conduction velocities. Unfortunately there are two classifications
commonly in use, one using Roman numerals I–IV and a second using the letters A, B, and C, but they are easily reconciled, as evident in Table 5.3. Efferent fibers are also classified
as A, B, and C fibers as well as by a different system utilizing
the Greek letters alpha (α) and gamma (γ). Furthermore, they
are also classified according to their modality, into GSE and
GVE fibers.
The spinal cord is composed
of a column of gray matter
surrounded by a sheath of
white matter. Gray matter is composed of neurons, their
processes, and neuroglia. It is the large number of nerve cell
bodies that is responsible for the grayish appearance of the
gray matter. White matter is composed of myelinated and
unmyelinated processes of neurons, neuroglia, and blood
vessels, and it is the white coloration of the myelin that gives
white matter its name.
Inspection of cross-sections of the spinal cord displays a
bilateral symmetry. The gray matter is arranged in the shape
of a butterfly and the appearance of this image, as well as the
ratio of white matter to gray matter, vary with level of the
segment being examined.
The cross-sectional area of gray matter is largest in the mid
to low cervical and mid to lower lumbar levels, which are the
regions of the spinal cord responsible for the neural supply of
the upper and lower limbs, respectively. The region of the
spinal cord that displays the least area of gray matter is at the
thoracic level. The cross-sectional area of the white matter is
greatest at the cervical level and smallest at the sacral level
of the spinal cord, since the total number of ascending and
descending nerve fibers increase in a rostral direction.
Because of these characteristics the segmental level of a crosssection of the spinal cord can easily be distinguished.
It is interesting to note that generally speaking the processes of the neurons run parallel to the longitudinal axis
of the spinal cord in white matter, but perpendicular to the
longitudinal axis of the spinal cord in gray matter.
During examination of a
cross-section of the gray
matter it becomes evident
that the two “wings” of the
butterfly-shaped gray matter
are connected to each other by a narrow strip of gray matter, known as the gray commissure, the center of which is
occupied by the central canal. Viewed in three dimensions,
the lateral aspect of the gray matter is concave and displays a
ventral (anterior) gray column and a dorsal (posterior) gray
column, as well as a small projection, the lateral (intermediolateral) gray column, which appears only between spinal
cord levels T1 and L2,3 (Fig. 5.7). The lateral gray column
represents the location of the cell bodies of the preganglionic
sympathetic neurons. It should be noted that these three
columns are also referred to as the anterior (ventral), posterior (dorsal), and lateral horns when the spinal cord is
examined in cross-sections, and therefore these terms are
frequently used interchangeably. Although the gray matter
is completely surrounded by white matter, the dorsal horn
approaches the limit of the spinal cord and is separated from
the dorsolateral sulcus by a small bundle of nerve fibers,
known as the dorsolateral tract (of Lissauer). The narrow
region of the dorsal horn in contact with the dorsolateral tract
is subdivided into two regions, the outer dorsomarginal nucleus and the somewhat deeper situated substantia gelatinosa.
The interface between the gray matter and white matter is
usually well defined, but at cervical levels the base of the
anterior gray column forms network-like interdigitations
with the adjoining white matter. This interwoven structure,
known as the reticular formation, is similar to other regions
present in the brain and caudal spinal cord levels and thus
is part of the reticular system, discussed later in this book
(see Chapter 14). The central canal of the spinal cord contains
CSF and is lined by ciliated cuboidal to columnar epithelium
composed of ependymal cells. In some regions the canal may
be partially or completely occluded by clusters of ependymal
cells. Immediately surrounding the ependymal cells is the
substantia gelatinosa centralis, a layer of neuroglia interspersed with occasional nerve cell bodies and fine nerve
fibers. The remainder of gray matter surrounding the substantia gelatinosa centralis is referred to as the gray commissure. The white matter surrounding the gray commissure is
called the anterior and posterior white commissure.
Much of the gray matter is composed of an intricate network
of neuronal processes. These may be the central processes
of unipolar neurons, the initial segments of motoneurons
(somatic and autonomic), axons that are crossing over from
one side of the spinal cord to the other, as well as the highly
complex and not well understood neuropil. The latter is
composed of nerve fibers whose extent is limited to the gray
matter. Neurons of the spinal cord gray matter are multipolar and are collected in various sized clusters, which, for the
sake of convenience, are described as belonging to the dorsal
gray column, lateral gray column, or ventral gray column.
The gray matter of the spinal cord can be organized into
nine layers plus the region surrounding the central canal,
named Rexed laminae I–X, after the Swedish neuroanatomist
who mapped out their distribution. These laminae are numbered in a dorsoventral direction, and generally correspond
to the nerve cell clusters in the three columns (Fig. 5.8;
Table 5.4).
The nuclei of the dorsal gray column function in the reception
and processing of sensory input from the central processes of
the unipolar neurons whose cell bodies are located in the
dorsal root ganglia. These nerve cells are subdivided into
four groups: the dorsomarginal nucleus, substantia gelatinosa, nucleus proprius, and nucleus dorsalis.
The dorsomarginal nucleus (Rexed lamina I) extends the
entire length of the spinal cord, capping the dorsal horn, and
receives afferent fibers carrying pain, temperature, and light
touch sensations. It also contributes fibers for the lateral and
ventral spinothalamic tracts. It contacts the dorsolateral tract
of Lissauer of the white matter.
The substantia gelatinosa of Rolando (Rexed lamina II)
extends the entire length of the spinal cord. It is densely
packed with Golgi type II neurons, known as gelatinosa
cells, that possess highly branched, unmyelinated axons.
These cells receive sensory input from the central fibers of
unipolar neurons of the dorsal root ganglia, delivering pain,
temperature, and light touch information. Descending fibers
from higher centers (such as the cerebral cortex) form excitatory and inhibitory synapses with the gelatinosa cells, thus
modifying the arriving pain and temperature sensations.
The nucleus proprius (Rexed laminae III and IV) extends
the entire length of the spinal cord. It is composed of densely
clustered large nerve cell bodies, located just ventral to the
substantia gelatinosa, and receives the central processes of
the majority of the unipolar neurons of the dorsal root ganglia. The nucleus proprius receives pain, light touch, and
temperature sensations and provides input to the lateral and
ventral spinothalamic tracts.
The nucleus dorsalis, also known as Clarke’s column
(Rexed lamina VII) extends from C8 to L3. It is located at the
base of the dorsal gray column and houses relatively large
cell bodies that receive synapses from proprioceptive fibers,
which bring information from Golgi tendon organs and
muscle spindles. Some of the axons of these large nerve cell
bodies travel in the dorsal spinocerebellar tracts.
The lateral nucleus (Rexed lamina VII) is composed of
the relatively small multipolar cell bodies of preganglionic
sympathetic neurons. They are present only between T1 and
L2,3, and they send their axons into the ventral root of the
spinal cord to enter the sympathetic trunk via the white rami
communicantes.
A similar nucleus, the sacral parasympathetic nucleus, is
located at sacral levels 2–4. These preganglionic neurons of
the sacral outflow of the parasympathetic nervous system are
also considered to belong to Rexed lamina VII.
The nuclei of the ventral gray column are large and small
multipolar motoneurons whose axons leave the spinal cord
via the ventral rootlets. The large motoneurons give rise to
alpha efferents that supply skeletal muscles with motor
innervation, whereas the smaller motoneurons supply
gamma efferents to intrafusal muscle fibers of muscle spindles, still others are interneurons. These nerve cells are subdivided into three major groups, medial, central, and lateral.
The medial group (Rexed lamina IX) extends almost the
entire length of the spinal cord (with the possible exceptions
of L5 and S1). Between T1 and L4 it is subdivided into two
components, the dorsomedial and ventromedial groups. The
motoneurons of the medial group provide innervation for
the skeletal muscles of the abdomen, the intercostal muscles,
and the muscles of the neck.
The central group (Rexed lamina IX) is the smallest of the
three groups and its distribution is not very extensive. The
central group is present only in the cervical and lumbosacral
segments of the spinal cord. Two regions of the cervical
aspect of the central group have special names, the phrenic
nucleus and the accessory nucleus. The phrenic nucleus
(extending from C3 to C6) is responsible for the innervation
of the diaphragm and the accessory nucleus (extending from
C1 to C6) is responsible for innervation of the sternocleidomastoid and trapezius muscles. Cells of the accessory
nucleus provide fibers for the spinal root of cranial nerve XI
(the spinal accessory nerve). The lumbosacral aspect of the
central group (L2 to S2) is known as the lumbosacral group
and its function is not known.
The lateral group (Rexed lamina IX) is present only in
the regions of the spinal cord responsible for the motor
innervation of the upper and lower extremities (C4 to T1 and
L2 to S3).
The gray matter that surrounds the central canal of the spinal
cord is known as the gray commissure (periependymal gray)
and the substantia gelatinosa centralis (both Rexed lamina
X). The gray commissure is subdivided into a posterior gray
commissure and an anterior gray commissure by the central
canal. The gray commissures and the substantia gelatinosa
centralis extend the entire length of the spinal cord and are
believed to be associated with the autonomic nervous system.
The white matter of the
spinal cord is also bilaterally
symmetric. It surrounds the
gray matter and is composed
mostly of myelinated and
unmyelinated nerve fibers.
It has two main functions:
1 To bring information into the central nervous system
(CNS) and transmit it to higher levels.
2 To transmit information from the higher levels to the
spinal cord and to muscles and glands.
Based on the presence of sulci and fissures, the white matter is subdivided into three major columns: the dorsal, lateral,
and ventral funiculi (Table 5.5). The dorsal funiculus is
bounded by the dorsal median and dorsolateral sulci; hence,
it is between the dorsal midline and the dorsal nerve rootlets.
The lateral funiculus is between the dorsolateral and ventrolateral sulci; hence it is between the dorsal and ventral
rootlets. The ventral funiculus is between the ventrolateral
sulcus and the ventral median fissure, that is the ventral
rootlets and the ventral midline. The cervical and upper
thoracic aspects of the dorsal funiculus (C1 to T6) is further
subdivided by the dorsal intermediate sulcus and septum
into a medial fasciculus gracilis and a lateral fasciculus
cuneatus. Moreover, the ventral funiculus houses the ventral
white commissure, the region of decussation for the spinothalamic tracts.
Within the funiculi, the nerve fibers that have similar destinations are arranged in bundles known as tracts (fasciculi).
Some of these fiber bundles, especially in the dorsal funiculus, are clearly defined into well recognizable tracts that are
separated from each other by glial sheaths, whereas most
tracts appear to have overlapping boundaries. Tracts are
classified into three categories, ascending, descending, and
intersegmental. Ascending tracts transmit sensory information to higher centers, whereas descending tracts relay motor
information originating at higher centers. The intersegmental
tracts convey information between spinal cord segments,
thus orchestrating intersegmental spinal reflexes. Although
these tracts will be discussed in detail in later chapters of this
book, the positions of these tracts are indicated in the transverse section of the spinal cord in Figure and Table.
The anterior spinal arteries,
direct branches of the vertebral arteries, join with each
other to form a single
median vessel, the anterior
spinal artery, which occupies

and follows the ventral median fissure of the spinal cord. This
vessel extends from within the cranial cavity throughout the
entire length of the spinal cord and provides small branches
that penetrate and supply the white and gray matter of the
spinal cord. The anterior spinal artery may be quite small in
the thoracic region (Fig. 5.10).
The posterior spinal arteries also arise from the vertebral
arteries directly or frequently indirectly by way of the inferior
cerebellar branch of the vertebral artery. Each posterior
spinal artery bifurcates to form two longitudinal vessels that
extend from within the cranial cavity throughout the entire
length of the spinal cord, sandwiching the dorsal rootlets
between them. These three vessels provide small branches
that penetrate and serve the white and gray matter of the
spinal cord.
The 32 pairs of radicular arteries are small vessels that
arise from arteries in the immediate vicinity of the spinal column. Each radicular artery enters the intervertebral foramen
where it bifurcates, forming an anterior and a posterior
radicular artery, which follow the ventral and dorsal roots,
respectively, to gain entrance into the vertebral canal. The
anterior and posterior radicular arteries anastomose with
branches of the anterior and posterior spinal arteries on the
surface of the spinal cord, and arborize to supply the white
and gray matter of the spinal cord. It should be stressed that
the radicular arteries are extremely important for the vascularization of the spinal cord, because, with the exception of
the cervical region, the anterior and posterior spinal arteries
by themselves are unable to provide an adequate vascular
supply to the spinal cord. Therefore, an injury to the spinal
nerve damages not only the afferent and efferent fibers of
a particular spinal cord level, but may also damage the
segmental white and gray matter by producing ischemic
conditions due to the reduction in blood supply from the
radicular artery serving that region. It should be noted that
the great ventral radicular artery (artery of Adamkiewicz)
is the largest, albeit inconsistent, of the radicular arteries
(Fig. 5.11). It usually arises on the left-hand side and serves
much of the inferior half of the spinal cord, entering the
vertebral canal between L2 and L3, and contributes to the
formation of the inferior aspect of the ventral spinal artery.
Several longitudinally arranged tortuous veins of the pia
mater are responsible for the venous drainage of the spinal
cord. These are the ventral and dorsal spinal veins that communicate with the segmentally arranged radicular veins. The
radicular veins follow the paths of their companion radicular
arteries to leave the vertebral canal via the intervertebral
foramina. Along the way they also communicate with the
epidural venous network embedded in the epidural fat of
the vertebral canal. The epidural venous network delivers
its blood into the cavernous sinus of the cranial cavity.
Cranially, the ventral and dorsal spinal veins drain into the
veins and venous sinuses of the cranial cavity.
Syringomyelia is a spinal cord disorder marked by the loss of the sense
of temperature and pain at levels involving several consecutive spinal cord
segments. Frequently, the other senses, such as touch and pressure, are
unaffected and then a dissociated anesthesia is said to be present. A number
of conditions may cause this disorder, including the presence of a cleft within
the spinal cord as well as an anomalous increase in the size of the central canal
of the spinal cord.
Spinal shock occurs infrequently and is characterized by complete anesthesia
and paralysis, including the absence of all reflexes, somatic or autonomic,
involving the body segments caudal to the site of damage. This condition may
be permanent if the spinal cord is transected or of temporary duration if the
spinal cord receives a sudden, but transient, injury, such as an unusually high
dose of spinal anesthesia.
Tabes dorsalis is a late stage effect of syphilis, arising about 10–20 years
after the disease was contracted. The condition is characterized by infection of
the dorsal column and dorsal roots causing sudden, sharp, shooting pain in the
lower extremities. Occasionally, the condition is accompanied by ulceration of
the feet, violent stomach cramps, and deterioration of the joints.
Brown-Séquard’s syndrome is the result of unilateral spinal cord lesions
characterized by contralateral pain and temperature loss and ipsilateral weakness and loss of proprioception.
Ependymomas are tumors involving usually the caudal end of the spinal cord
and the filum terminale. The unchecked cell division of the ependymal cells
results in the presence of small to medium-sized growth in the affected area.
These cells produce large quantities of proteins that elevate the protein levels
in the CSF with a consequent reduction in the ability of the arachnoid granulations to deliver CSF into the lacunae lateralis/superior sagittal sinus. Therefore,
the patient begins to suffer from hydrocephalus with headaches, and MRI
examinations display the presence of enlarged cerebral ventricles.
Spina bifida is a prenatally acquired developmental defect of incomplete
fusion of one or more vertebral arches along with the incomplete fusion of the
lips of the neural tube. It is a relatively frequent anomaly, whose incidence is
about 1–2% of all births. The subtypes of spina bifida depend on the severity of
the lack of fusion. The most common ones are spina bifida anterior, spina
bifida cystica, and spina bifida occulta. Spina bifida anterior occurs along the
ventral surface of the vertebral column. This incomplete closure of the vertebrae is often accompanied by anomalous development of the thoracic and
abdominal viscera. Spina bifida cystica (also known as spina bifida aperta)
is a more serious defect involving herniation of the spinal cord (myelocele)
and/or of the meninges (meningocele) through the congenital defect in the vertebral column. The meningocele and myelocele may protrude far enough to
reach the skin and may even rupture the skin with subsequent leakage of CSF
and the possibility of bacterial infection resulting in meningitis. Spina bifida
occulta is the most common of the spina bifida cases, being present in about
5% of the population. This is the mildest form of spina bifida and may not even
be symptomatic. In cases like this the patient may even be unaware of the
defect until for other reasons radiographs or MRI are taken of the region of the
defect. Then it appears as an osseous defect without the accompanying herniation of the spinal cord or of the meninges. Frequently, the site of the defect
is apparent on the overlying skin by the presence of a tuft of hair and/or of a
dimple over the region of the osseous lesion.
This patient has an acute
myelopathy, meaning spinal cord
pathology, which in this case seems to be
in the upper thoracic region. This is
located at T4 or above, but not below. The
sensory level makes that very clear. The
location of the back pain is also consistent.
The brisk reflexes and Babinski response
(a pathologic reflex of dorsiflexion of the
big toe with a scratch on the lateral bottom of the foot) point to a CNS cause, as
opposed to a peripheral nervous system
cause. Bilateral weakness in the legs, and
not the arms, also makes a thoracic cord
pathology most likely. A lesion in the
brain that causes leg weakness rarely
leaves the arm or face unaffected, and is
almost always unilateral (although there
are exceptions).
This case represents a neurologic
emergency. She should be admitted to the
hospital without delay. The cause is not
immediately clear, but the acute onset
and rapid progression mandate immediate action. Work-up would include
imaging of the thoracic spine, preferably
with MRI. This would almost certainly
reveal the pathology; probably in this
case a mass of some sort. The mass would
have to be rapidly growing and the
rapid deterioration and back tenderness
indicates that the mass is most likely
extra-axial (outside the cord). This
could either be intradural or extradural.
These types of masses can cause vascular
compromise as well as physical
compression of the cord.
Some causes of extra-axial masses
include metastatic tumors (lung, breast,
prostate, etc.), primary tumors (meningiomas, fibromas, etc.), epidural abscess,
vascular malformations, or hemorrhage.
Compression from vertebral fracture or
intervertebral disc herniation can look
similar. Treatment for any of these is
surgical removal of the offending mass.
A 28-year-old man was struck
in the back of the head by a steel
beam while at work. He apparently lost
consciousness for approximately 30
minutes. He was hospitalized since he
was still confused and disoriented
throughout his stay in the emergency
room. By the next day he was felt to be
back to normal except for a headache
and was discharged. The patient had no
memory of the event, and he had no
memory of an important conversation he
had had with his boss 5 minutes before
the head trauma. He also had no memory
of being in the emergency room and no
memories of events subsequent to the
injury until the next day. He also noted,
besides persistent headache, that he
was somewhat forgetful since the
injury. Neurologic examination was
unremarkable.
The brain, a bilaterally symmetric, soft, gelatinous structure surrounded by its meninges and enclosed in its bony
cranium, is continuous with the spinal cord at the foramen
magnum at the base of the skull. At birth the brain weighs
less than 400 g, but by the beginning of the second year of life
it has more than doubled in weight to 900 g. The adult brain
weighs between 1,250 and 1,450 g, and demonstrates a gender differential, since brains of males generally weigh more
than those of females. This statement, however, should be
tempered by the evidence that, in adults, the ratio of brain to
body weight is greater in females than in males and that the
increase in weight is due more to the proliferation of neuroglia than to the mitotic activity of neurons. An additional
point of interest is that there does not appear to be a relationship between brain weight and intelligence.
As detailed in Chapter 2, it is evident during embryogenesis that the brain is subdivided into five continuous
regions, from rostral to caudal: the telencephalon, diencephalon, mesencephalon, metencephalon, and myelencephalon.
As the brain grows in size and complexity, these regions
fold upon and over one another, so that in the adult the
evidence of these subdivisions is no longer clearly apparent.
The present chapter will not discuss the functional aspects
of the brain; instead its basic morphology and architecture.
are detailed to provide an anatomical framework of reference
for the chapters that follow, and many of the major topics
introduced in this chapter are discussed in further detail in
specific chapters in this textbook. Much of this terminology
should be memorized so that when, in later chapters, functional connections among regions of the brain are discussed
the student has a visual image of the location of the various
structures and the pathways the connections take.
If the adult brain is viewed in three dimensions, only three
regions are clearly visible, and these are the cerebrum, cerebellum, and part of the brainstem.
The cerebral hemispheres
are narrower posteriorly, at
the occipital pole, than anteriorly, at the frontal pole.
They are large, oval structures that superficially resemble the surface of a shelled
walnut (Fig. 6.1). The midline longitudinal cerebral fissure,
occupied in life by the falx cerebri, incompletely separates the
two cerebral hemispheres from one another. The floor of the
cerebral fissure is formed by the corpus callosum, a large
myelinated fiber tract that forms an anatomical and functional connection between the right and left hemispheres.
The surface few millimeters of the cerebral hemisphere are
composed of a highly folded collection of gray matter, known
as the cerebral cortex. This folding increases the surface area
and presents elevations, gyri, and depressions, sulci. Deep to
the cortex is a central core of white matter that forms the bulk
of the cerebrum and represents fiber tracts, supported by
neuroglia, ferrying information destined for the cortex and
cortical responses to other regions of the central nervous
system (CNS). Buried within the mass of white matter are
collections of neuron cell bodies, some of which are lumped
together under the rubric of basal ganglia, even though, technically, they are nuclei. Large collections of gray matter are
also present in the diencephalons, namely, the epithalamus,
thalamus, hypothalamus, and subthalamus.
The cerebrum is a hollow structure and the cavities within
the cerebral hemispheres are called the right and left lateral
ventricles, which communicate with the third ventricle via
the interventricular foramen (foramen of Monro) (Fig. 6.2A).
The two lateral ventricles are separated from one another by
two closely adjoined non-nervous membranes, each known
as a septum pellucidum. Ependymal cells line each lateral
ventricle, and protruding into each ventricle is a choroid plexus
that functions in the manufacture of cerebrospinal fluid.
Each cerebral hemisphere is
subdivided into five lobes:
the frontal, parietal, temporal, and occipital lobes,
and the insula (Table 6.1).
Additionally, the cortical constituents of the limbic system
are also considered to be a region of the cerebral hemisphere
and some consider it to be the sixth lobe, the limbic lobe.
Viewed from the side, each cerebral hemisphere resembles the shape of a boxing glove, where the thumb is
the temporal lobe and is separated from the parietal lobe
by the lateral fissure (fissure of Sylvius) (Fig. 6.1). The floor of
the lateral fissure is formed by the insula (island of Reil) that
is hidden by the frontal, parietal, and temporal opercula
(L., “lids”), regions of the same named lobes. Although
the geographic distributions of many of the sulci and gyri
are relatively inconsistent, some regularly occupy specific
locations, are recognizable in most brains, and are named.
The sulci are generally smaller and shallower than the
fissures, and one of these, the central sulcus (central sulcus of
Rolando), separates the frontal lobe from the parietal lobe.
The division between the parietal and occipital lobes is not
readily evident when viewed from the lateral aspect because
it is defined as the imaginary line between the preoccipital
notch and the parieto-occipital notch. However, it is clearly
delimited on the medial aspect of the cerebral hemisphere,
where the boundary between these two structures is the
parieto-occipital sulcus and its continuation, the calcarine
fissure (Fig. 6.3).
On its lateral aspect, the frontal lobe extends from the frontal
pole to the central sulcus, constituting the anterior one-third
of the cerebral cortex. Its posteriormost gyrus, the precentral
gyrus, consists of the primary motor area and is bordered
anteriorly by the precentral sulcus and posteriorly by the
central sulcus. The region of the frontal lobe located anterior
to the precentral sulcus is subdivided into the superior,
middle, and inferior frontal gyri. This subdivision is due
to the presence, though inconsistent, of two longitudinally
disposed sulci, the superior and inferior frontal sulci. The
inferior frontal gyrus is demarcated by extensions of the lateral fissure into three subregions: the pars triangularis, pars
opercularis, and pars orbitalis. In the dominant hemisphere, a
region of the inferior frontal gyrus is known as Broca’s area,
which functions in the production of speech.
On its inferior aspect, the frontal lobe presents the longitudinally disposed olfactory sulcus. Medial to this sulcus is the
gyrus rectus (also known as the straight gyrus), and lateral to
it are the orbital gyri. The olfactory sulcus is partly occupied
by the olfactory bulb and olfactory tract (Figs 6.4, 6.5). At
its posterior extent, the olfactory tract bifurcates to form the
lateral and medial olfactory striae. The intervening area between the two striae is triangular in shape and is known as
the olfactory trigone and it abuts the anterior perforated
substance.
On its medial aspect, the frontal lobe is bordered by the
arched cingulate sulcus, which forms the boundary of the superior aspect of the cingulate gyrus. The quadrangular-shaped
cortical tissue anterior to the central sulcus is a continuation of the precentral gyrus and is known as the anterior
paracentral lobule.
The parietal lobe is interposed between the frontal and
occipital lobes and is situated above the temporal lobe. On its
lateral aspect, its anteriormost gyrus, the postcentral gyrus, is
the primary somesthetic area to which primary somatosensory information is channeled from the contralateral half of
the body. The remainder of the parietal lobe, separated from
the postcentral gyrus by the postcentral sulcus, is subdivided
by the inconsistent intraparietal sulcus, into the superior and
inferior parietal lobules. The former is an association area
involved in somatosensory function, whereas the latter is
separated into the supramarginal gyrus, which integrates
auditory, visual, and somatosensory information, and the
angular gyrus, which receives visual input.
On its medial aspect, the parietal lobe is separated from the
occipital lobe by the parieto-occipital sulcus and its inferior
continuation, the calcarine fissure. This region of the parietal
lobe is subdivided into two major structures, the anteriorly
positioned posterior paracentral lobule (a continuation of
the postcentral gyrus) and the posteriorly situated precuneus.
The temporal lobe is separated from the frontal and parietal
lobes by the lateral fissure and from the occipital lobe by an
imaginary plane that passes through the parieto-occipital
sulcus. The anteriormost aspect of the temporal lobe is
known as the temporal pole. On its lateral aspect, the temporal
lobe exhibits three parallel gyri, the superior, middle, and
inferior temporal gyri, separated from each other by the
inconsistently present superior and middle temporal sulci.
The superior temporal gyrus of the dominant hemisphere
contains Wernicke’s area, which is responsible for the
individual’s ability to speak and understand the spoken and
written word.
Hidden within the lateral fissure is the superior aspect of
the temporal lobe whose surface is marked by the obliquely
running transverse temporal gyri (of Heschl), the primary
auditory cortex.
The inferior aspect of the temporal lobe is grooved by the
inferior temporal sulcus that is interposed between the
inferior temporal gyrus and the lateral occipitotemporal
gyrus (fusiform gyrus). The collateral sulcus separates
the fusiform gyrus from the parahippocampal gyrus of the
limbic lobe.
The occipital lobe extends from the occipital pole to the
parieto-occipital sulcus. On its lateral aspect, the occipital lobe
presents the superior and inferior occipital gyri, separated
from each other by the horizontally running lateral occipital
sulcus.
On its medial aspect, the occipital lobe is subdivided into the
superiorly located cuneate gyrus (cuneus) and the inferiorly
positioned lingual gyrus, separated from each other by the
calcarine fissure. The cortical tissue on each bank of this
fissure is known collectively as the striate cortex (calcarine
cortex), and forms the primary visual cortex.
In order to view the insula the frontal, temporal, and parietal
opercula have to be pulled apart, since this lobe is submerged
within and forms the floor of the lateral sulcus. It is completely circumscribed by the circular sulcus. The lateral surface of the insula is subdivided into several short and long
gyri, the most prominent of which is located posteriorly. The
insula is believed to be associated with taste, and perhaps
other visceral functions.
The limbic lobe is a complex
region and includes the
cingulate gyrus, parahippocampal gyrus, hippocampal
formation, subcallosal gyrus,
parolfactory gyrus, and the preterminal gyrus.
The following description is a view of the medial aspect of
the hemisected brain and the various regions of the corpus
callosum are obvious landmarks. Therefore, the corpus callosum will now be described, even though it is not a part of the
limbic lobe. The anterior extent of the corpus callosum,
known as the genu, bends inferiorly and turns posteriorly,
where it forms a slender connection, the rostrum, with the
anterior commissure. The posterior extent of the corpus callosum is bulbous in shape, and is known as the splenium (see
Fig. 6.3).
The cingulate gyrus is located above the corpus callosum
and is separated from it by the callossal sulcus. As the
cingulate gyrus continues posteriorly, it follows the curvature of the corpus callosum and dips beneath the splenium to
continue anteriorly as the isthmus of the cingulate gyrus. The
anterior continuation of the isthmus is the parahippocampal
gyrus whose anteriormost extent is known as the uncus.
Above the parahippocampal gyrus is the hippocampal
sulcus, which separates the parahippocampal gyrus from the
hippocampal formation (composed of the hippocampus,
subiculum, and dentate gyrus).
Just beneath the rostrum of the corpus callosum is the
subcallosal gyrus. The connection between the anterior commissure and the optic chiasma is the lamina terminalis and
the cortical tissue anterior to the lamina terminalis is the
parolfactory gyrus and preterminal gyrus. The subcallosal,
parolfactory, and preterminal gyri are referred to as the
subcallosal area.
The best accepted system of functional regionalization of the
cerebral cortex was developed by the neuroanatomist, K.
Brodmann, who in the late nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries mapped the cortex into 47 unique areas, each associated with specific morphological characteristics. Although
later investigators refined and expanded his map into more
than 200 areas and assigned functional characteristics to
them, Brodmann’s original classification is still widely used.
The major areas, their location, and function are presented in
Table (6.2).
The cerebral cortex is well
endowed with neurons,
neuroglia, nerve fibers, and
a rich vascular supply. The arrangement of the three types of neurons that populate the
cortex—pyramidal cells, stellate neurons, and fusiform
neurons—permit the classification of the cortex into three
types: the archicortex (allocortex), mesocortex ( juxtallocortex), and neocortex (isocortex).
The archicortex, phylogenetically the oldest region, is
composed of only three layers and is located in the limbic system. The mesocortex, phylogenetically younger, is composed
of three to six layers, and is located predominantly in the
insula and cingulate gyrus. The neocortex, phylogenetically
the youngest region of the cerebral cortex, is composed of six
layers and comprises the bulk of the cerebral cortex.
Although the cerebral cortex is arranged in layers, superimposed upon this cytoarchitecture is a functional organization of cell columns. Each cell column is less than 0.1 mm in
diameter, is perpendicular to the superficial surface of the
cortex, passes through each of the six cortical layers, and is
composed of neurons with similar functions. All neurons of a
single column respond to like stimuli from the same region of
the body.
The organization of the six layers of the neocortex is
known as its cytoarchitecture, where each layer has a name
and an associated Roman numeral (Table 6.3).
The central core of white
matter that forms the substance of the cerebrum is
composed of myelinated
nerve fibers of varied sizes
and their supporting neuroglia. These fibers may be classified
into the following three categories: commissural, projection,
and association fibers.
Commissural fibers (transverse fibers) interconnect the right
and left cerebral hemispheres. There are four bundles of commissural fibers, the corpus callosum, anterior commissure,
posterior commissure, and hippocampal commissure (see
Fig. 6.3).
The largest group of the commissural fibers, the corpus
callosum, is comprised of four regions: the anteriormost
rostrum, the curved genu, the relatively flattened body, and
its posteriormost region, the splenium. The corpus callosum
connects the neocortex of the right hemisphere with that of
the left.
The anterior commissure connects the right and left
amygdalas, the olfactory bulbs, and several cortical regions
of the two temporal lobes.
The posterior commissure connects the right and left pretectal region and related cell groups of the mesencephalon.
The hippocampal commissure (commissure of the
fornix) joins the right and left hippocampi to one another.
Projection fibers are restricted to a single hemisphere and
connect the cerebral cortex with lower levels, namely the
corpus striatum, diencephalon, brainstem, and spinal cord.
The majority of these fibers are axons of pyramidal cells and
fusiform neurons. These fibers are component parts of the
internal capsule, which is subdivided into the anterior limb,
genu, posterior limb, retrolentiform, and sublentiform
regions. The projection fibers may be subdivided into corticopetal and corticofugal fibers.
Corticopetal fibers are afferent fibers that bring information from the thalamus to the cerebral cortex. They consist of
thalamocortical fibers.
Corticofugal fibers are efferent fibers that transmit information from the cerebral cortex to lower centers of the brain and
spinal cord. They consist of the corticobulbar, corticopontine,
corticospinal, and corticothalamic fibers.
Association fibers, also known as arcuate fibers, are
restricted to a single hemisphere and are subdivided into two
major categories, short arcuate fibers and long arcuate fibers.
They are the axons of pyramidal cells and fusiform neurons.
Short arcuate fibers, which connect adjacent gyri, do not usually reach the subcortical white matter of the cerebral cortex;
most of them are confined to the cortical gray matter. The
long arcuate fibers, which connect nonadjacent gyri, consist
of the following fiber tracts (Table 6.4): the uncinate fasciculus, cingulum, superior longitudinal fasciculus, inferior
longitudinal fasciculus, and fronto-occipital fasciculus.
The basal ganglia, called
ganglia even though they are
nuclei, are large collections
of cell bodies that are embedded deep in the white matter
of the brain (Fig. 6.6). These soma include those deep nuclei of
the brain and brainstem which, when damaged, produce
movement disorders. Thus the basal ganglia are composed of
the caudate nucleus, lenticular nucleus (putamen and globus
pallidus), subthalamic nucleus of the ventral thalamus, and
the substantia nigra of the mesencephalon (the caudate
nucleus and the putamen together are referred to as the striatum). These nuclei have numerous connections with various
regions of the CNS; some receive input and are categorized as
input nuclei, some project to other regions and are referred
to as output nuclei, whereas some receive input, project to
other regions of the CNS, and have local interconnections and
these are known as intrinsic nuclei.
The diencephalon, interposed between the cerebrum
and the midbrain, has four
regions: the epithalamus,
thalamus (Gr., “bed, bedroom”), hypothalamus, and subthalamus. The right and left halves of the diencephalon are
separated from one another by a narrow slit-like space, the
ependymal-lined third ventricle. Rostrally, the interventricular foramina (of Monro) leads from the lateral ventricles into
the third ventricle, whereas caudally, the third ventricle is
connected to the fourth ventricle by the cerebral aqueduct
(of Sylvius).
The epithalamus, composed of the pineal body, stria
medullaris, and habenular trigone, constitutes the dorsal
surface of the diencephalon. The right and left thalami compose the bulk of the diencephalon and form the superior
aspect of the lateral walls of the third ventricle. The two thalami, structures composed of numerous nuclei, are connected
to each other by a bridge of gray matter, the interthalamic
adhesion (massa intermedia). Some of the nuclei of the
thalamus form distinctive bulges on its surface, namely the
pulvinar (L., “cushion”) and the medial and lateral geniculate bodies. The boundary between the thalamus and the
hypothalamus is marked by a groove, the hypothalamic
sulcus, located along the lateral walls of the third ventricle.
Structures associated with the hypothalamus are the pituitary gland and its infundibulum, the tuber cinereum, and
the two mammillary bodies. The subthalamic nuclei and
fiber tract form the subthalamus.
The cerebellum is located
in the posterior aspect of
the brain, just below the
occipital lobes of the cerebrum (Figs 6.7–6.8). It is
separated from the cerebrum
via a horizontal dural reflection, the tentorium cerebelli. The
cerebellum is connected to the midbrain, pons, and medulla
of the brainstem via three pairs of fiber bundles, the superior,
middle, and inferior cerebellar peduncles, respectively.
Viewing the cerebellum, it can be seen that it is composed of
the right and left cerebellar hemispheres and the narrow,
intervening vermis. The vermis is also subdivided into a
superior and an inferior portion, where the superior portion
is visible between the two hemispheres, while its inferior
portion is buried between the two hemispheres.
The surface of the cerebellum has horizontal elevations,
known as folia, and indentations between the folia, known as
sulci. Some of these sulci are deeper than others and they
are said to subdivide each hemisphere into three lobes, the
small anterior lobe, the much larger posterior lobe, and the
inferiorly positioned flocculonodular lobe (formed from
the nodule of the vermis and the flocculus of each cerebellar hemisphere). The anterior lobe is separated from the
posterior lobe by the primary fissure, and the posterolateral fissure separates the flocculonodular lobe from the
posterior lobe (Figs 6.7–6.9).
Similar to the cerebrum, the cerebellum has an outer rim
of gray matter, the cortex, an inner core of nerve fibers, the
medullary white matter, and the deep cerebellar nuclei,
located within the white matter. The cortex and white matter
are easily distinguished from each other in a midsagittal section of the cerebellum, where the white matter arborizes,
forming the core of what appears to be a tree-like architecture, known as the arbor vitae.
Histologically, the cerebellar cortex is a three-layered
structure, the outermost molecular layer, the middle
Purkinje layer, and the innermost granular layer. The
granular layer is well defined due to the presence of nucleic
acids in the nuclei of its numerous, small cells. The Purkinje
layer, composed of a single layer of large Purkinje cell perikaryons, is also easily recognizable. The molecular layer is
rich in axons and dendrites as well as capillaries that penetrate deep into this layer.
Four pairs of nuclei are located within the substance of the
cerebellar white matter. These are the fastigial, dentate,
emboliform, and globose nuclei. The connections between
the cortical regions and the deep nuclei of the cerebellum
permit the subdivision of the cerebellum into three zones—
the vermal, paravermal, and hemispheric—where each zone
is composed of deep cerebellar nuclei, white matter, and
cortex.
The brainstem, the oldest
part of the CNS, is composed
of the mesencephalon,
metencephalon, and myelencephalon (although some authors also include the diencephalon) (Figs 6.9, 6.10). Since these are embryologic terms,
one may also state that the brainstem is composed of the
mesencephalon, pons, cerebellum, and medulla oblongata.
As parts of it have been overgrown by the cerebrum and the
cerebellum, its dorsal aspect is mostly hidden from view in
the whole brain, whereas its ventral and lateral aspects are
visible. Removal of the cerebral and cerebellar hemispheres
exposes the brainstem in its entirety and it is usually examined in that fashion as well as by hemisecting the entire brain.
The mesencephalon (midbrain) is a relatively narrow
band of the brainstem surrounding the cerebral aqueduct, extending from the diencephalon to the pons. The
dorsal aspect of the midbrain is known as the tectum (L.,
“roof”) and incorporates the paired superior and inferior
colliculi (also known as the corpora quadrigemina). These
structures are associated with the lateral and medial geniculate bodies, respectively, and they are all associated with
visual and auditory functions. The trochlear nerve (CN IV)
exits the dorsal aspect of the mesencephalon just below the
inferior colliculus. All other cranial nerves exit the ventral
aspect of the brainstem. The region of the mesencephalon
below the cerebral aqueduct is known as the midbrain
(mesencephalic) tegmentum (L., “cover”). The cerebral
hemispheres are connected to the brainstem by two large
fiber tracts, the cerebral peduncles, and the depression
between the peduncles is known as the interpeduncular
fossa, the site of origin of the oculomotor nerve (CN III).
The cerebellum overlies and
hides the dorsal aspect of the
brainstem, but its ventral
aspect, the pons, is clearly
evident. Rostrally, the superior pontine sulcus acts as the
boundary between the metencephalon and the midbrain and
the inferior pontine sulcus as the boundary between the
metencephalon and the myelencephalon. Part of the floor of
the fourth ventricle is formed by the dorsal aspect of the pons,
and is known as the pontine tegmentum, the structure that
houses the nuclei of the trigeminal, abducent, facial, and
vestibulocochlear nerves. Cranial nerves VI, VII, and VIII
leave the brainstem at the inferior pontine sulcus, whereas
the trigeminal nerve exits the brainstem through the middle
cerebellar peduncle.
The caudal-most portion of
the brainstem, the myelencephalon, also known as the
medulla oblongata, extends
from the inferior pontine sulcus to the spinal cord. The
boundary between them is the region where the lateral walls
of the fourth ventricle converge in a V shape at the midline
obex (at the level of the foramen magnum).
The ventral surface of the myelencephalon displays
the anterior midline fissure, bordered on each side by the
pyramids and crossed by the pyramidal decussations,
connecting the right and left pyramids to each other. The
olives are olivepit-shaped swellings lateral to each pyramid.
The hypoglossal nerve is evident as a number of thin
filaments on each side of the brainstem, arising from the
anterior lateral sulcus between the pyramids and olives.
The glossopharyngeal, vagus, and accessory nerves arise
from the groove dorsal to the olives.
The dorsal surface of the myelencephalon presents the
posterior median fissure, which is interposed between the
right and left tuberculum gracilis, swellings formed by
the nucleus gracilis. Just lateral to the tuberculum gracilis is
another swelling, the tuberculum cuneatus, a bulge formed
by the underlying nucleus cuneatus. The caudal continuation
of the tuberculum gracilis is the fasciculus gracilis, and the
continuation of the tuberculum cuneatus is the fasciculus
cuneatus. Just lateral to the tuberculum cuneatus is another
swelling, the tuberculum cinereum, formed by the descending tract of the trigeminal nerve.
A review of the head CT that
was performed in the emergency
room revealed the extent of the patient’s
injuries. There were modest contusions of
the bilateral anterior and orbital regions
of the frontal lobes and the left anterior
temporal lobe. Contusions are brain
“bruises.” The patient had a concussion,
meaning any alteration of consciousness
resulting from head trauma. Persistent
headache and memory difficulties are
often characteristics of “postconcussion
syndrome,” which can also include dizziness, poor balance, poor concentration,
and other vague symptoms.
There are several ways in which head
trauma can cause brain injury. As in the
above case, contusion can result. The locations of these are often predictable. Coup
and contrecoup are terms used to define
the location of contusion related to the
site of head trauma. A coup injury refers to
a contusion that occurs to the part of the
brain that directly underlies the site of
head trauma. A contrecoup injury refers to
a contusion that occurs in parts of the
brain directly opposite the site of head
trauma. The patient above suffered
contrecoup contusions. The anterior and
orbital regions of the frontal lobes and the
anterior temporal lobes are the most common locations of contusions. The skull is
somewhat rigid and is the first to have
contact with the object of injury. There is a
very sudden acceleration or deceleration
of the skull. The brain within is somewhat
mobile. As the skull accelerates or decelerates, the brain crashes into the skull at
certain points. The damage occurs mostly
to those parts of the brain surface that are
most angular and also in close proximity
to the bones of the skull.
There are other locations and
mechanisms of injury that are often
more important, especially in cases
where disability or death occur from
head trauma. There is also a rotational
component to brain movement inside
the skull at the moment of impact. This
causes shearing stresses, especially to
the upper brainstem region, which can
damage the reticular system, which
maintains consciousness and awareness.
This is probably the mechanism by which
head injury causes loss or alteration of
consciousness. Damage to the corpus
callosum is also often demonstrated
pathologically, secondary to its rotational
momentum against the rigid falx. Diffuse
axonal injury refers to diffuse damage to
white matter, specifically to axons, which
has been demonstrated pathologically.
This is also thought to be due to shearing
or stretching injury to the long and
thin axons due to sudden and severe
rotational and angular stresses.
A 23-year-old male comes to
the emergency room complaining
of 2 days of fever, headache, stiff neck,
and general ill feeling. Symptoms have
been getting worse over the course of
these 2 days. He notes pain on movement
of his eyes and sensitivity to light. His
roommate who accompanies him noted
he has been somewhat lethargic. Before
the onset of the present symptoms he had
been quite well. He had had no seizure.
Upon examination in the ER, he
appeared ill and lethargic but easily
arousable. He had a fever of 38.5°C.
Blood pressure, heart rate, and respirations were normal. With the patient
supine the neck was passively flexed.
The neck was abnormally stiff (i.e., it
did not flex to the normal degree). At
the same time as the neck was flexed,
his knees flexed slightly. When eye
movement was tested, the patient noted
his eyes hurt when they moved. Strength,
sensation, reflexes, and all other parts of
the neurologic and general exams were
normal or unremarkable.
The central nervous system (CNS) is enclosed in the bony cranium and vertebral column. Separating the brain and spinal
cord from the calcified tissue are three more or less concentric
membranes, the outermost, dense, irregular collagenous
connective tissue, the dura mater, also known as the pachymeninx, the middle spiderweb-like arachnoid, and the very
flimsy, innermost pia mater. The arachnoid and pia mater,
together, are also known by the term leptomeninges and are
separated from one another by the subarachnoid space. The
dura mater forms reflections upon itself, some of which contain dural venous sinuses. The meninges surrounding the
brain and spinal cord are compared in Table 7.1.
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), a clear fluid, manufactured by
the choroid plexuses of the ventricles of the brain, circulates
in the subarachnoid space, the ventricles of the brain, and the
central canal of the spinal cord. It is delivered into the lacunae
lateralis, and from there into the vascular supply by structures, derived from both the pia mater and arachnoid, known
as arachnoid granulations. The four ventricles of the brain
are fluid-filled, ependymal-lined cavities that are continuous
with each other as well as with the central canal of the spinal
cord. These spaces are the remnants of the lumen of the
embryonic neural tube.
Although the dura mater
surrounding the brain is continuous with the dura mater
surrounding the spinal cord
at the level of the foramen magnum, it is customary to discuss
the two separately. The cranial dura mater has two layers
(Fig. 7.1), an outer periosteal dura mater that is attached to
the internal table of the diploë and acts as a true periosteum,
and an internal meningeal dura mater that is in intimate contact with the arachnoid. The periosteal and meningeal layers
of the dura mater are tightly attached to each other throughout much of their extent; however, in certain regions the two
layers are separated from each other to form venous channels, known as sinuses.
The periosteal dura mater is a coarse type of connective
tissue composed of dense irregular collagenous connective
tissue interlaced with some elastic fibers. It is a very tough,
mostly inelastic tissue that is tightly attached to the surrounding bony vault of the skull. It is especially firmly attached at
the sutures and to the floor of the cranial cavity. At the foramina of the skull the periosteal dura mater forms a connective
tissue sheath around the cranial nerves as they leave the skull
and this dural layer is quickly replaced by the epineurium,
derived from the extracranial connective tissue. At the rim of
the foramen magnum the periosteal dura becomes continuous with the periosteum of the vertebral canal.
The meningeal layer of the dura is also composed of dense
irregular collagenous connective tissue. Its innermost aspect
is lined by a single layer of flattened fibroblasts that form
an epithelioid sheath that is in direct contact with, and separates the arachnoid from, the collagenous connective tissue
component of the meningeal dura.
The periosteal layer of the
dura mater is richly supplied
by blood vessels, whereas
the meningeal layer has no
vascular supply. The blood
vessels of the periosteal layer include the middle meningeal
and accessory meningeal arteries of the middle cranial fossa,
as well as the meningeal branches of the anterior and posterior ethmoidal arteries and meningeal branches of the internal carotid artery of the anterior cranial fossa. Meningeal
branches of the vertebral, occipital, middle meningeal, and
ascending pharyngeal arteries serve the periosteal dura of
the posterior cranial fossa. Most of these vessels enter the
cranial fossa via foramina and canals of the skull, such as
the jugular and mastoid foramina and the hypoglossal canal.
Blood is drained from the dura by meningeal veins that
empty their blood (indirectly through venous lacunae) into
several of the sinuses as well as into nearby emissary veins
and diploic veins.
The dura mater possesses a very rich sensory nerve supply, derived mostly from cranial nerve V (trigeminal nerve)
but also from the first three cervical spinal nerves that serve
the dura mater of the posterior cranial fossa. Sympathetic fibers also reach the dura mater, arising from the vertebral
and carotid plexuses, to serve the dural blood vessels.
The meningeal layer of the
dura mater is responsible
for the formation of several
folds that serve to separate
parts of the brain from one another (Figs 7.2, 7.3). These folds
are reflections of the meningeal layer of the dura upon itself
and are known as the falx cerebri, tentorium cerebelli, and
falx cerebelli. Additionally, the meningeal layer of the dura
also forms a diaphragm over the hypophyseal fossa, known
as the diaphragma sella, as well as a roof over the trigeminal
ganglion, thus forming a shallow compartment known as the
cavum trigeminale (Meckel’s cave).
The falx cerebri is located in the midline longitudinal
cerebral fissure, which separates the right and left cerebral
hemisphere from one another. Its narrow anterior aspect is
attached to the crista galli and its broader, posterior aspect is
attached to the superior surface of the tentorium cerebelli,
extending posteriorly as far as the internal occipital protuberance. The superior, convex surface of the falx cerebri is
attached to the periosteal layer of the dura, leaving only a
narrow, endothelially lined channel, the superior sagittal
sinus. This sinus is the largest dural venous sinus, which
begins just behind the crista galli, at the foramen cecum, and
terminates posteriorly at the confluence of sinuses. The
inferior surface of the falx cerebri is a free, concave-shaped
edge, which contains the inferior sagittal sinus. At the
junction where the falx cerebri joins and fuses with the tentorium cerebelli is another endothelially lined space, the straight
sinus, that receives blood from the inferior sagittal sinus and
the great cerebral vein. Blood from the straight sinus also
enters the confluence of sinuses.
The tentorium cerebelli, a horizontal reflection of the
meningeal layer of the dura mater, is interposed between
the cerebellum and the occipital lobes of the cerebrum. Its
anterior sharp concave margin is free, cradling the midbrain.
The lateral borders of the tentorium cerebelli extend much
farther anteriorly than does its midline (where it is joined by
the falx cerebri). The superior surface of the central region is
convex, being highest along the length of the straight sinus.
The transverse sinuses, endothelially lined vascular spaces,
sit in the lateral aspect of the tentorium cerebelli, where
this dural reflection is attached to the lips of the grooves for
the left and right transverse sinuses of the occipital bone.
Anteriorly, the lateral aspect of the tentorium is attached to
the superior surface of the petrous portion of the temporal
bone and forms endothelially lined spaces, the right and left
superior petrosal sinuses, and continues anteriorly to attach
to the posterior clinoid processes of the sphenoid bone. The
free, medial edge of the tentorium cerebelli crosses over the
lateral edge and attaches to the anterior clinoid processes of
the sphenoid bone. Because of the separate attachments of the
free and attached aspects of the tentorium cerebelli, an oval
opening is created in the dura mater. This opening, known as
the tentorial incisure, surrounds the midbrain and permits
the ascent of the posterior cerebral arteries to reach the cerebral hemispheres.
The falx cerebelli, a relatively small reflection of the meningeal
layer of the dura folded upon itself, is interposed between the
right and left cerebellar hemispheres. The posterior border of
the falx cerebelli meets the periosteal layer of the dura mater
on the internal aspect of the occipital bone, where it is
attached along the entire length of the internal occipital
crest, and forms the endothelially lined occipital sinuses.
The diaphragma sella is a thin reflection of the meningeal
layer of the dura mater. Its lateral aspect is attached to the
clinoid processes, whereas its central aspect is open, thus
forming an incomplete roof over the hypophyseal fossa that
is penetrated by the infundibulum of the hypophysis. The
anterior and posterior edges of the diaphragma sella house
the anterior and posterior intercavernous sinuses.
The cavum trigeminale (Meckel’s cave) is a narrow, slit-like
region interposed between the periosteal and meningeal
layers of the dura mater positioned on the trigeminal impression of the petrous portion of the temporal bone. It
is occupied by the trigeminal ganglion as well as by the
sensory and motor roots of the trigeminal nerve.
There is a potential space
between the meningeal layer
of the cranial dura mater
and the cranial arachnoid
(Figs 7.4, 7.5), known as the
subdural space, that, according to some neuroanatomists, is occupied by an extremely
thin film of fluid. The subarachnoid space may become
blood-filled in a case of hemorrhage due to a cerebrovascular
accident, although according to some neuroanatomists and
histologists the subarachnoid space is not involved; instead
an intradural space is created. Similar to the dura mater, the
arachnoid’s surface is composed of a single layer of flattened
fibroblasts that form an epithelioid sheath, from which
trabeculae, known as arachnoid trabeculae, extend toward
and attach to the external surface of the pia mater. These
trabeculae are formed from highly attenuated fibroblasts that
surround some collagen fibers. The space between the epithelioid sheath and the pia mater, known as the subarachnoid space, is occupied by cerebrospinal fluid and is
traversed by numerous arachnoid trabeculae. Blood vessels
from the vascular meninges perforate the arachnoid to reach
the pia mater; however, each vessel is completely surrounded
by arachnoid fibroblasts and, therefore, the vessels never
actually enter the subarachnoid space. It should be recalled
that the blood–brain barrier, established by the endothelial
cells of the blood vessels, prevents large molecules from leaving the bloodstream.
The arachnoid resembles the dura mater in that it does not
follow closely the contours of the brain; therefore, over the
sulci, the subarachnoid space is much deeper than over the
gyri. Moreover, in certain areas of the brain the arachnoid
completely diverges from the pia mater, forming expanded
subarachnoid spaces known as subarachnoid cisterns. As
the CSF percolates through the subarachnoid spaces it also
enters the subarachnoid cisterns, filling them. The major subarachnoid cisterns are the cisterna magna (cisterna cerebellomedullaris), pontine cistern, and interpeduncular and
chiasmatic cisterns (cisterna basalis), as well as the superior
cistern (cistern of the great cerebral vein).
The cisterna magna, the largest of the subarachnoid cisterns, is formed between the caudal aspect of the cerebellum
and the dorsal surface of the medulla oblongata as the
arachnoid stretches across these two structures rather than
following the contour of the brain. It is the cisterna magna
that communicates with the fourth ventricle of the brain via
the medial foramen of Magendie, through which the CSF
formed by the choroid plexuses of the ventricles of the brain
enters the subarachnoid space. The pontine cistern is a much
smaller space than the cisterna magna. It is located along
the ventral surface of the pons and communicates with the
subarachnoid space of the spinal cord caudally, and with the
pontine cistern rostrally. The basilar artery traverses the pontine cistern. The interpeduncular cistern is located between
the right and left cerebral peduncles and receives CSF by
way of the two lateral foramina of Luschka, from the fourth
ventricle. The interpeduncular cistern is continuous with the
chiasmatic cistern and, frequently, the two are considered to
be a single cistern, the cisterna basalis, even though the optic
chiasma is interjected between them. The pontine cistern is
traversed by the posterior and middle cerebral arteries as
well as by the cerebral arterial circle, whereas the anterior
cerebral artery traverses the chiasmatic cistern. The superior
cistern (cistern of the great cerebral vein) is located in the
vicinity of the superior aspect of the cerebellum, the corpora
quadrigemina, and the pineal body. As its alternate name
implies, the great cerebral vein traverses the superior cistern.
Arachnoid granulations (also known as arachnoid villi) are
small, but visible with the unaided eye, mushroom-shaped
evaginations of the arachnoid protruding into the lumen of
the dural sinuses (Fig. 7.6). Most of the arachnoid granulations are associated with lacunae lateralis, diverticula of the
superior sagittal sinus, although some jut into the lumen of
the sinus. The core of an arachnoid granulation, composed of
arachnoid trabeculae, is continuous with the subarachnoid
space and is surrounded by the epithelioid layer of the arachnoid and of the dura, forming a membrane that is two cell
layers thick. As the arachnoid granulation evaginates into the
lacuna lateralis it is invested by some cellular and collagenous elements of the meningeal dura mater, which in turn is
surrounded by the endothelial lining of the blood vessel. CSF
from the subarachnoid space enters into the core of the arachnoid granulation and from there penetrates, probably by
osmosis, the epithelioid layers of the arachnoid granulation
and the endothelial lining to escape into the lacuna lateralis.
Therefore, the function of the arachnoid granulations is transporting CSF manufactured by the choroid plexuses of the
ventricles of the brain into the vascular system. It is important
to note that although the arachnoid granulations protrude
into the venous sinuses, they are always separated from
the blood by the endothelial lining of the dural sinus/lacuna
lateralis.
The cranial pia mater is
composed of a single layer
(or occasionally two layers)
of attenuated fibroblasts
that form a transparent epithelioid membrane, which
closely invests the contours of the brain. The pia mater, unlike
the arachnoid or the dura mater, follows the gyri and the
sulci, maintaining an uninterrupted contact with the surface
of the brain. Since the pia mater is vascular it has numerous
blood vessels associated with it; however, because this layer
is so thin, the vessels are in part surrounded by cells derived
from the arachnoid trabeculae and, in part, by cells of the pia
mater. Deep to the epithelioid sheath is a thin, discontinuous layer of collagen and elastic fibers. The end-feet of the
astrocytes form a protective layer that underlies this subpial
extracellular matrix, separating it from the neural tissue. In
addition to separating the subarachnoid space from the brain
tissue, the pia mater also serves to degrade neurotransmitter
substances and to prevent material in the subarachnoid
space from entering the nervous tissue, as evidenced by the
inability of erythrocytes to cross the pia mater in cases of
subarachnoid hemorrhages.
The dura mater of the spinal
cord differs from that of
the cranial cavity because
it is composed only of the
meningeal layer. The periosteal layer is the true periosteum of the vertebral canal and
is separated from the meningeal layer by a loose connective
tissue and fat-filled epidural space. A plexus of veins is
embedded in the connective tissue and fat layer. At the level
of the second lumbar vertebra the spinal cord ends in the conical-shaped conus medullaris, but the dura mater continues
as a cylindrical sheath until it narrows into a cone-shaped
structure at the second sacral vertebra. It then continues as
a very narrow cylindrical sheath, which becomes anchored
into the periosteum of the first and second coccygeal
vertebra.
The spinal arachnoid is seamlessly continuous with the cranial arachnoid at the foramen magnum. It closely adheres to
the spinal dura mater and there is a potential subdural space
between the two layers. The narrow subarachnoid space is
filled with CSF that percolates through and around the arachnoid trabeculae. At the level of the conus medullaris the
subarachnoid space becomes much larger, is referred to as
the lumbar cistern, and is filled with the dorsal and ventral
rootlets of the spinal nerves, collectively referred to as the
cauda equina. These nerve rootlets extend to the lumbar,
sacral, and coccygeal intervertebral foramina through which
they exit to form their respective spinal nerves. As the rootlets
of the spinal nerves leave the vertebral canal, they are surrounded by a thin arachnoid sheath to be replaced by the
proper connective tissue layers (endoneurium, perineurium,
and epineurium) as they enter the realm of the peripheral
nervous system.
The spinal pia mater very
closely invests the spinal
cord and at the level of the
conus medullaris it is gathered into a very thin, nonnervous filament, the filum terminale, that extends for about
20 cm from the tip of the conus medullaris to become
attached to the periosteum of the first coccygeal vertebra.
Narrow, triangular, fibrous extensions of the pia mater
extend laterally through the arachnoid to attach to the
meningeal layer of the dura mater, helping to anchor the
spinal cord along its entire length. These triangular extensions of the pia resemble shark’s teeth and, therefore, are
known as denticulate ligaments. There are 21 pairs of denticulate ligaments, positioned in such a fashion that they are
situated about half way between successive spinal nerves.
The first pair is located at the level of the foramen magnum
and the last pair is situated caudal to the 12th thoracic
vertebra.
The venous sinuses of the
dura mater, formed within
reflections of the meningeal
dura, are endothelially lined
venous channels that are
devoid of valves (Fig. 7.8).
These sinuses collect blood from the brain and from emissary
veins and also receive CSF from the subarachnoid spaces.
They empty their contents into the superior jugular bulb of
the internal jugular vein as that bulb sits in the jugular foramen. Based on their location and draining patterns the dural
venous sinuses are grouped into two major categories, the
anterior inferior and posterior superior groups.
The anterior inferior group of dural sinuses include the
cavernous, anterior and posterior intercavernous, sphenoparietal, and superior and inferior petrosal sinuses and the
basilar plexus.
The two, rather large cavernous sinuses (Fig. 7.9), located on
either side of the body of the sphenoid just inferior to the
hypophyseal fossa, are connected to each other by the very
small anterior and posterior intercavernous sinuses, thus
forming the circular sinus, encircling the infundibulum of
the pituitary gland. The lumen of each cavernous sinus is
criss-crossed by a spongy network of endothelially covered
filamentous structures that reduce the luminal size and
reduce the velocity of blood flow. The cavernous sinus
receives its blood from a number of sources, including the
pterygoid plexus of veins (via the emissary veins), the
angular vein (via the inferior and superior ophthalmic veins),
as well as the middle and inferior cerebral veins. There are
numerous interrelationships of the cavernous sinus with the
venous channels on the outside of the skull, which presents
many possible pathways for the entry of infectious agents
with a possibility of meningitis. The superior and inferior
petrosal sinuses drain blood from the cavernous sinus into
the transverse sinus and into the superior bulb of the internal
jugular vein, respectively.
The cavernous sinus is associated with the internal carotid
artery as well as a number of cranial nerves, four of which are
embedded in its wall and one other that passes through the
lumen of the sinus. Embedded in the lateral wall of the cavernous sinus are the ophthalmic and maxillary divisions of
the trigeminal nerve and the oculomotor and trochlear nerves.
The internal carotid artery and its associated carotid sympathetic plexus of fibers, as well as the abducent nerve,
pass through the lumen of the cavernous sinus. It should be
stressed, however, that the vessel and nerves travel in a sheath
of endothelial cells that isolate them from the bloodstream.
The sphenoparietal sinus is a very small sinus that is located
on the inferior aspect of the edge of the lesser wing of the
sphenoid bone. It receives blood from several tiny meningeal
veins and from the anterior temporal diploic vein, and drains
into the cavernous sinus.
The superior petrosal sinus is located in a shallow groove on
the superior aspect of the petrous portion of the temporal
bone. It receives blood via small veins from the tympanic cavity, as well as from the cerebellar and inferior cerebral veins
and drains into the transverse sinus just prior to its joining the
sigmoid sinus.
The inferior petrosal sinus, located in the shallow groove
formed between the petrous temporal and occipital bones,
receives blood from the cavernous and superior petrosal
sinuses, the veins of the pons, medulla, and cerebellum, and
from the labyrinthine veins. The inferior petrosal sinus drains
into the superior bulb of the internal jugular vein.
The basilar plexus, a group of slender venous channels
located in the meningeal dura mater on the basilar portion
of the occipital bone, acts as a venous connection between
the right and left inferior petrosal sinuses. It drains into the
anterior vertebral plexus of veins.
The posterior superior group of dural sinuses includes
the superior sagittal, inferior sagittal, straight, transverse,
sigmoid, petrosquamous, and occipital sinuses as well as the
confluence of sinuses (see Figs 7.1–7.3, 7.9, 7.10).
The superior sagittal sinus, located in the superior, convex
aspect of the falx cerebri, begins at the foramen cecum, where
blood from the emissary vein of the foramen cecum enters it
and, usually, ends in the transverse sinus of the right side.
Along its length the superior sagittal sinus grooves the internal aspects of the frontal bone, the suture line between the
two parietal bones, and the squamous portion of the occipital
bone, forming the groove for the superior sagittal sinus. This
sinus receives blood from many of the cerebral veins, from the
superior cerebellar veins, and the emissary veins traversing
the parietal foramina. Additionally, lacunae lateralis, endothelially lined spaces housing arachnoid granulations, drain
their blood mixed with CSF into the superior sagittal sinus.
The inferior sagittal sinus is much smaller, narrower, and
shorter than the superior sagittal sinus. It is located in the
concave, inferior aspect of the falx cerebri occupying a little
more than its posterior half. Occasional veins from the medial
aspect of the cerebral hemispheres and small veins of the falx
cerebri deliver their blood into the inferior sagittal sinus,
which, in turn, drains into the straight sinus.
The straight sinus occupies the interface between the tentorium cerebelli and the falx cerebri and is formed by the junction of the great cerebral vein with the inferior sagittal sinus.
It receives blood from those two structures as well as from
some of the cerebellar veins and drains, usually, into the left
transverse sinus.
The paired transverse sinuses begin at the internal occipital
protuberance of the occipital bone and are located in the
lateral aspect of the tentorium cerebelli. They are responsible
for the formation of the grooves for the transverse sinuses. The
right transverse sinus is usually larger and is the continuation
of the superior sagittal sinus, whereas the left transverse
sinus is the continuation of the straight sinus, although, occasionally the reverse occurs. Each transverse sinus ends in,
and delivers its blood to, the sigmoid sinus; whereas each
receives blood from the inferior cerebellar vein, the diploic
veins from the temporal and occipital regions, the veins from
the cerebral hemispheres, and from the petrosquamous and
superior petrosal sinuses.
Each sigmoid sinus—a continuation of each transverse
sinus—follows an S-shaped curve as it grooves the temporal
and occipital bones to terminate in the posterior aspect of the
superior bulb of the internal jugular vein in the jugular foramen. The petrosquamous sinus, when present, is located in
the meningeal reflection of the dura along the intersection of
the petrous and squamous portions of the temporal bone. It
receives blood from a diploic vein in its vicinity and drains
into the transverse sinus. The smallest of the sinuses is the
occipital sinus located in the posterior margin of the falx
cerebelli. It delivers its blood into the transverse sinus or,
with equal frequency, into the confluence of sinuses located
just lateral to the internal occipital protuberance. The
confluence of sinuses receives blood from the superior
sagittal, straight, and occipital sinuses. Blood flow in the confluence of sinuses is somewhat turbulent and pressures are
established in such a fashion that, usually, blood arriving
from the straight sinus is shunted into the left transverse
sinus, whereas blood from the superior sagittal sinus reaches
the right transverse sinus.
Although the choroid
plexuses located in every
ventricle of the brain manufacture cerebrospinal fluid,
the majority of this fluid is formed in the two lateral ventricles. The average rate of CSF production is approximately
14–35 mL per hour for a total daily production of less than
800 mL. However, only about 150 mL of CSF occupies the
ventricles, central canal of the spinal cord, perivascular space,
and the subarachnoid space and its dilated cisterna at any one
time because there is a constant drainage of CSF into the
superior sagittal sinus by the numerous arachnoid granulations. CSF, a clear fluid with a low density, is rich in sodium,
potassium, and chloride ions but has almost no protein and
only occasional lymphocytes and a few desquamated epithelioid cells (Table 7.2). CSF forms a protective cushion for
the brain and spinal cord and is also a recipient of the brain
metabolites, which then reach the systemic circulation as the
CSF is returned to the bloodstream.
The blood–CSF barrier, composed of zonulae occludentes
—tight junctions formed by the fusion of cell membranes
of contiguous cells of the simple cuboidal epithelium of the
choroid plexus—maintains the chemical stability of the CSF.
These tight junctions prevent paracellular movement of substances, thus requiring them to take the transcellular route
via facilitated and active transports across the epithelium of
the choroid plexus, resulting in differences in the composition of CSF and plasma.
Although the ventricles of
the brain have been described
previously (see Chapter 6),
they are addressed here for
completeness of discussion
of the CSF. The four ventricles and the central canal of the spinal cord are the remnants
of the lumen of the embryonic neural tube.
The largest ventricles, the paired lateral ventricles, are
horseshoe-shaped cavities separated from one another by
the septum pellucidum, and are located in the right and left
cerebral hemispheres. Each lateral ventricle possesses a body
and four horns, the anterior, posterior, lateral, and inferior horns.
The anterior horn hollows out the frontal lobe; the inferior
lobe is the cavity of the temporal lobe, whereas the occipital
lobe houses the variable-sized posterior lobe of the cerebral
hemisphere. The body of each lateral ventricle is located
mostly in the parietal lobe. The body and the inferior horn
contain a relatively extensive choroid plexus that is responsible for the manufacture of most of the CSF. The two lateral
ventricles communicate with the third ventricle via the right
and left interventricular foramina (of Monro) (Fig. 7.10).
The third ventricle is the quadrilateral, slit-like, vertically
positioned space whose walls are formed by the right and left
thalami. It is interrupted by a mass of gray matter, the massa
intermedia, that forms a bridge between the two thalami. The
roof of the third ventricle is formed by the tela choroidea,
whereas its floor is formed by the hypothalamus, whose separation from the thalamus is indicated on the wall of the third
ventricle by the hypothalamic sulcus. The third ventricle has
several outpocketings: the preoptic, infundibular, mammillary, and pineal recesses. It is drained by the cerebral aqueduct (of Sylvius) that conveys CSF into the fourth ventricle.
The fourth ventricle is an irregularly shaped space in the
hindbrain, extending from the cerebral aqueduct (of Sylvius)
posteriorly to the obex anteriorly. It is continuous with the
central canal of the spinal cord. The lateral aspect of the
fourth ventricle has two openings, the right and left foramina
of Luschka and the single, median foramen of Magendie, all
three foramina draining the CSF from the fourth ventricle
into the subarachnoid space. Specifically, the foramina of
Luschka lead to the interpeducular cistern, whereas the
foramen of Magendie delivers the CSF into the cerebellomedullary cistern.
Meningitis, a bacterial or viral inflammation of the meninges, is an exceptionally dangerous condition affecting about two or three people per 100,000 in
the USA annually (the incidence in neonates is lower, about five in 1,000,000).
The symptoms in neonates and babies include fever, lethargy, respiratory distress, poor feeding, vomiting, irritability, an unusual high-pitched cry when
held and quiet when placed down in a stationary position, and occasionally
bulging at the fontanelle. In children and adults the symptoms are different and
include high fever and chills, severe headache, painful and stiff neck, nausea
and/or vomiting, and in later stages, sleepiness, confusion, and difficulty in
waking up. Meningitis has a high degree of morbidity and mortality, especially
if not diagnosed properly.
Meningiomas are benign, encapsulated tumors composed of fusiform cells
originating in the leptomeninges, specifically the arachnoid. Usually these
tumors occur in adults and reach a fairly large size, on average 3 cm, before
being diagnosed. Approximately 20% of all brain tumors and 10% of all spinal
cord tumors are meningiomas, but, depending on their location, most can
be treated with relative ease with good prognosis. The symptoms include
headaches, seizures, weakness, and possibly paralysis or impairment of some
brain functions due to pressure being applied to specific areas of the brain by
the tumor. Diagnosis requires either radiographic or MRI techniques.
The integrity of the blood–brain barrier prevents many substances, including
some neurotransmitters and drugs, from penetrating it. In order to permit the
delivery of certain drugs through the blood–brain barrier, procedures were
developed such as perfusion with a hypertonic solution, mannitol. This temporarily disables the fasciae occludentes of the capillary endothelial cells,
allowing the delivery of certain therapeutic drugs.
The constant production of CSF by the choroid plexus must be mirrored by its
constant resorption by the arachnoid villi. If too little CSF is resorbed or if there
is a blockage of CSF flow within the ventricular system of the brain, the result
will be swelling of the brain tissue, a condition known as hydrocephalus (G.,
“water head”). This situation results in an increased head size in the neonate
and fetus, and impaired muscular, cognitive, or other mental functions in the
adult, possibly resulting in death if left untreated.
The immediate concern for
any ER physician should be the
possibility of meningitis (infection of the
meninges) or possibly even encephalitis
(infection within the brain itself). These
are two examples of neurologic emergencies, and require careful evaluation. Both
of these conditions could result in death,
depending on the particular infectious
organism involved (among other things).
Work-up did reveal that this patient
had acute meningitis. Because the initial
presentation was so suggestive of
meningitis, he should have been started
immediately on appropriate antibiotics.
Any acute infectious illness can be
accompanied by dangerously low
blood pressure (i.e., sepsis) or other
abnormalities of vital signs. A head CT
was performed to look particularly for
bleeding or a mass lesion. This was
normal (as it almost always is in cases of
meningitis). A lumbar puncture was
performed to look at the CSF. This
showed elevated protein (80 mg/L),
elevated white blood cells (210 cells/mm3
),
and no red blood cells. The white cells
were mostly lymphocytes. Staining
for bacteria, fungi, and parasites was
negative. CSF cultures were negative
(although these are not known until a few
days after the CSF is drawn).
After several days, the patient fully
recovered. This case represents aseptic
meningitis since no organism was
identified. Most cases of aseptic
meningitis are assumed to be viral. This
is actually a fairly common infection,
and very mild cases are certainly missed
since patients may not even go to the
doctor for it. Viral meningitis is usually a
self-limiting infection and is often mild.
However, bacterial meningitis is very
serious and often results in death or
permanent disability. Both viral and
bacterial infections are acute, but other
organisms cause subacute or chronic
meningitis such as tuberculosis or fungi.
A 68-year-old woman presents
to the emergency room with a sudden onset of right arm and leg weakness
and altered speech. The right side of her
face is noted by the family to be “droopy”
and they say she is speaking “gibberish.”
This began very suddenly about 3 hours
before presenting to the ER. The symptoms have been about the same since the
onset. The history cannot be obtained
from the patient herself since her speech
is not intelligible.
The exam shows the patient to be alert
and attentive. She can speak words but
they are contextually inaccurate and she
cannot form understandable sentences or
even phrases. She cannot speak the names
of simple objects that are presented to
her, and she cannot follow direction
appropriately. The right side of her face
and her right arm are very weak, while
the right leg is only mildly weak. The rest
of the neurologic exam is unremarkable.
The average brain weighs only about 1,250–1,450 g but
receives about 750 mL of blood per minute, almost 20% of the
total blood volume, indicating its need for a large supply of
oxygen and nutrients, especially glucose. In order to provide
the brain with such a high volume of blood, two pairs of
major arteries—the right and left vertebral arteries and the
right and left internal carotid arteries—deliver all of their
blood almost exclusively to the brain. These four vessels form
an anastomotic network, the cerebral arterial circle (of
Willis), a very effective system that is designed to ensure an
uninterrupted blood supply to the brain. The brain’s requirement for a constant blood flow is evidenced by the fact that
interruption of the blood supply for 10–15 seconds results in
losing consciousness and after 5 minutes without blood flow
to the brain irreversible brain damage occurs. With the
notable exceptions of the basilar artery and the anterior communicating artery, all other arteries of the brain are paired.
Before discussing the blood supply of the brain, it should
be noted that although the description that follows implies
very specifically established vascular patterns, there are
numerous variations even in larger vessels. The vertebral
arteries serve the occipital lobes of the cerebral hemispheres,
brainstem, parts of the thalamus, as well as the cerebellum,
whereas the internal carotid artery supplies blood to the
remainder of the brain. One tends to think of larger vessels
as having thick walls, but those of the brain are thin walled.
Furthermore, since the arteries of the brain travel in the
subarachnoid space, if there is a hemorrhage the blood
accumulates in that space. Finally, it should be realized that
there is only a limited amount of collateral circulation in the
brain, even though the cerebral arterial circle forms anastomotic connections between the right and left sides of the brain.
Although the vascular supply of the spinal cord has been
covered in Chapter 5, it will be repeated here for two reasons:
so that the reader does not have to refer back and so that the
reader can appreciate the vascular supply of the entire central
nervous system (CNS).
The anterior spinal arteries,
direct branches of the vertebral arteries, join with each
other to form a single median
vessel, the anterior spinal
artery, which occupies and
follows the ventral median fissure of the spinal cord (Fig. 8.1).
This vessel extends from within the cranial cavity throughout the entire length of the spinal cord and provides small
branches that penetrate and supply the white and gray matter of the spinal cord. Moreover, this vessel also supplies the
medulla oblongata. The anterior spinal artery may be quite
small in the thoracic region.
The posterior spinal arteries also arise from the vertebral arteries directly, or frequently indirectly, by way of the
inferior cerebellar branch of the vertebral artery. Each posterior
spinal artery bifurcates to form two longitudinal vessels that
extend from within the cranial cavity throughout the entire
length of the spinal cord, sandwiching the dorsal rootlets
between them. These three vessels provide small branches
that penetrate and serve the white and gray matter of the
spinal cord as well as the medulla oblongata.
The 32 pairs of radicular arteries are small vessels that
arise from arteries in the immediate vicinity of the spinal
column. Each radicular artery enters the intervertebral foramen where it bifurcates, forming an anterior and a posterior
radicular artery, which follow the ventral and dorsal roots,
respectively, to gain entrance into the vertebral canal. The
anterior and posterior radicular arteries anastomose with
branches of the anterior and posterior spinal arteries on the
surface of the spinal cord, and arborize to supply the white
and gray matter of the spinal cord. It should be stressed that
the radicular arteries are extremely important for the vascularization of the spinal cord, because, with the exception of
the cervical region, the anterior and posterior spinal arteries
by themselves are unable to provide an adequate vascular
supply to the spinal cord. Therefore, an injury to a spinal
nerve damages not only the afferent and efferent fibers of a
particular spinal cord level, but may also damage the segmental white and gray matter by producing ischemic conditions due to the reduction in blood supply from the radicular
artery serving that region. It should be noted that the great
ventral radicular artery (artery of Adamkiewicz) is the
largest, albeit inconsistent, of the radicular arteries. It usually
arises on the left-hand side and serves much of the inferior
half of the spinal cord, entering the vertebral canal between
L2 and L3, and contributes to the formation of the inferior
aspect of the ventral spinal artery.
Several longitudinally arranged tortuous veins of the pia
mater are responsible for the venous drainage of the spinal
cord (Fig. 8.2). These are the ventral and dorsal spinal veins
that communicate with the segmentally arranged radicular
veins. The radicular veins follow the paths of their companion radicular arteries to leave the vertebral canal via the intervertebral foramina. Along the way they also communicate
with the epidural venous network embedded in the epidural fat of the vertebral canal. The epidural venous network
delivers its blood into the cavernous sinus of the cranial
cavity. Cranially, the ventral and dorsal spinal veins drain
into the inferior cerebellar veins and inferior petrosal sinuses.
he basal lamina-lined
endothelial cells of the capillaries of the brain and spinal
cord form a blood–brain
barrier. These endothelial
cells not only form fasciae
occludentes with each other, but they have only a limited
ability to form caveolae, relying instead mostly on receptormediated transport to transfer material between the capillary
lumen and the neural tissue of the CNS. Therefore, most
macromolecules injected into the capillary lumen are unable
to gain access into the intercellular spaces of the brain and
spinal cord. Similarly, most macromolecules injected into the
intercellular compartment of the CNS are unable to enter the
capillary lumen, unless the endothelial cells possess specific
receptors for them. Small, noncharged molecules (e.g., O2,
H2O, CO2) and numerous small lipid-soluble materials,
including some drugs, can dissolve through the lipid membrane of the endothelial cells and thus are able to penetrate
the blood–brain barrier. Molecules, such as some of the vitamins, amino acids, glucose, and nucleosides, can penetrate
the blood–brain barrier via carrier proteins, with or without
passive diffusion. Ion channels are also present in the
endothelial cell membranes and they are responsible for the
transport of ions across the blood–brain barrier.
The end-feet of astrocytes contact and form a sheet around
the basal lamina of the capillaries of the CNS. These end-feet
are referred to as the perivascular glia limitans. These astrocytes function not only in maintaining the neurochemical
balance of the intercellular compartment of the CNS by
removing excess K+ ions and neurotransmitters that were
released into the intercellular spaces, but also in transferring
metabolites from the capillary lumen to neurons in their
vicinity.
The internal carotid artery, a
terminal branch of the common carotid artery, ascends
in the neck, enters the cranial
cavity through the carotid
canal of the petrous portion
of the temporal bone, and
reaches the cavernous sinus from below. It passes through,
and subsequently pierces, the roof of the cavernous sinus and
enters the cranial cavity where it is flanked by the oculomotor
and optic nerves (Fig. 8.3). The internal carotid artery then
approximates the anterior perforated substance where it
terminates into its various branches. Along this path, from
the neck to its termination, the internal carotid artery makes a
number of almost 90° turns, thus reducing both the pressure
and the velocity of blood it brings to the thin-walled vessels
of the brain. Although the internal carotid artery is said to be
divided into four regions—the cervical, petrous, cavernous,
and cerebral—only the cavernous and cerebral portions
are discussed in this textbook. Readers interested in the 
The cavernous portion of the internal carotid artery passes
through the substance of the cavernous sinus, but is isolated
from the blood of the cavernous sinus by being invested with
a simple squamous epithelium. The abducent nerve accompanies the internal carotid artery through the cavernous
sinus. While in the sinus the artery describes an S-shaped
curve and gives off small branches: the cavernous, superior, and inferior hypophyseal, ganglionic, and anterior
meningeal arteries. As their names suggest, these vessels
serve the areas of their namesake (Table 8.1).
The cerebral portion of the internal carotid artery is quite
short (Fig. 8.3). Almost as soon as it pierces the roof of the
cavernous sinus it gives rise to its branches, the ophthalmic,
anterior choroidal, and posterior communicating arteries,
and its two terminal branches, the anterior cerebral and middle cerebral arteries. The ophthalmic artery is not discussed
in this textbook.
The anterior choroidal artery is a rather small, narrow artery
that arises from the posterior aspect of the internal carotid
and follows the path of the optic tract until it reaches the
lateral geniculate body, where it enters the choroid fissure
to reach and supply the choroid plexus of the inferior horn
of the lateral ventricle (Table 8.2). It gives off numerous
branches along the way. These branches serve structures
in their vicinity, including the optic tract, lateral geniculate
body, optic radiation, hippocampus, posterior limb of the
internal capsule, and the tail of the caudate nucleus.
The posterior communicating artery connects the cerebral
portion of the internal carotid artery to the posterior cerebral
branch of the basilar artery (Table 8.2). The right and left
arteries are not identical, in that one is frequently smaller
than the other, and, in fact, one may be entirely absent or
doubled. The main function of this vessel is to ensure a viable
blood supply to the brain in case the internal carotid or vertebral artery becomes occluded. However, it does also have
central branches—thin, unsubstantial vessels—that pierce the
region of the cerebrum base that is posterolateral to the
infundibulum of the pituitary, and serve part of the posterior
limb of the internal capsule, the medial aspect of the thalamus,
and the tissue forming the lateral border of the third ventricle.
The anterior cerebral artery, one of the two terminal
branches of the internal carotid artery, passes between the
frontal lobes in the beginning of the longitudinal cerebral
fissure, where it lies within a few millimeters of the anterior
cerebral artery of the other side (Figs 8.3, 8.4). The two vessels
follow the genu and then the superior border of the corpus
callosum until they each anastomose with the posterior cerebral artery, a branch of the basilar artery. The branches of the
anterior cerebral artery are classified into the anterior communicating artery, the central branches, and the cortical
branches (Table 8.3).
The anterior communicating artery is a very short vessel, no
more than 5–6 mm in length, that connects the right and left
anterior cerebral arteries to each other, forming the anterior
end of the cerebral arterial circle (of Willis). It has two or more
small branches, the anteromedial branches, which serve the
region of the optic chiasma.
A number of small, unnamed vessels arise from the initial
part of the anterior cerebral artery, just before the origin of the
anterior communicating artery; these supply the septum
pellucidum as well as the anterior part of the corpus callosum.
A larger branch, the medial striate artery (also referred to as
the recurrent artery), arises just after the origin of the anterior
communicating artery. It follows the anterior limb of the
internal capsule to supply parts of the following regions of
the basal ganglia: the head of the caudate nucleus, part of the
putamen, the globus pallidus, and the anterior limb of the
internal capsule.
The cortical branches of the anterior cerebral artery arise
from that vessel as it courses along the genu and superior
aspect of the corpus callosum. These branches, named by the
areas that they serve, are the orbital, frontal, and parietal
arteries.
The orbital branches distribute to the inferior aspect of the
frontal lobes as they lie on the bony roof of the orbit, and serve
the gyrus rectus, medial orbital gyrus, and olfactory lobe.
The frontopolar and callosomarginal branches constitute
the frontal branches of the anterior cerebral artery. The frontopolar artery originates at the level of the genu of the corpus
callosum and serves the medial surface of the superior frontal
gyrus and the region of the lateral surface of the superior and
middle frontal gyri. The callosomarginal artery branches
from the anterior cerebral artery at the genu of the corpus callosum and parallels its parent artery as far posteriorly as the
postcentral gyrus. It supplies blood to the corpus callosum,
the cingulate gyrus, the medial aspect of the superior frontal
gyrus, as well as to the precentral and postcentral gyri.
The remaining portion of the anterior cerebral artery,
frequently renamed the pericallosal artery, extends as far
posteriorly as the parieto-occipital sulcus, and gives rise to
the anterior and posterior parietal arteries. These two vessels
and their branches serve the medial aspect of the precuneate
gyrus and neighboring structures.
The middle cerebral artery, the terminal branch and largest
branch of the internal carotid artery, enters the lateral fissure
(of Sylvius), passes along the free surface of the insula, and
gives off several branches that ramify over the dorsal and lateral surfaces of the cerebral cortex (Figs 8.3–8.6). The middle
cerebral artery has central and cortical branches, where the
former supply blood to the deeper structures and the latter
serve the cortical regions (Table 8.4).
There are 10–15 slender vessels, the striate arteries (lenticulostriate arteries), that arise from the middle cerebral artery
as it gains entry into the lateral fissure. These vessels pierce
the floor of the lateral sulcus to supply structures deep within
the white matter of the cerebral cortex, including the corpus
striatum, much of the head and body of the caudate nucleus,
and large portions of the lenticular nucleus and of the external and internal capsules, passing as deep as the external
surface of the thalamus.
The cortical branches originate from the middle cerebral
artery as it courses along the lateral sulcus. These vessels,
named according to their location and distribution, are the
orbital, frontal, parietal, and temporal branches.
The orbital branches, the most prominent of which is the
orbitofrontal artery, serve the inferior frontal gyrus and the
lateral aspect of the orbital surface of the frontal lobe as it lies
over the bony roof of the orbit. The frontal branches supply
the middle frontal and precentral gyri as well as a region
of the inferior frontal gyrus. The anterior and posterior parietal branches serve the postcentral gyrus as well as the
caudal aspect of the superior and all of the inferior parietal
lobules. Two other branches, the parietotemporal and parietooccipital arteries, serve the remainder of the parietal lobe,
terminating at the parieto-occipital sulcus, thus supplying
the angular and supramarginal gyri. The temporal branches
consist of three main vessels, the anterior, middle, and posterior temporal arteries. They serve the lateral aspect of the
entire temporal lobe as far posteriorly as the occipital gyri.
The vertebral artery, the
largest branch of the subclavian artery, arises from its
first part and ascends in the
neck, traveling through the
foramina transversaria of the 6th through 1st (atlas) vertebrae. It describes an S-shaped curve along the posterior arch
of the atlas, passes through the foramen magnum and enters
the cranial cavity where it joins its counterpart of the other
side to form the basilar artery. Only the cranial branches
of the vertebral artery are described, and these are the
meningeal branches, the posterior inferior cerebellar artery,
and the medullary branches (Table 8.5).
The two or three meningeal branches of the vertebral artery
serve the falx cerebelli. They ramify between the periosteal
and meningeal layers of the dura mater of the cerebellar fossa.
The posterior inferior cerebellar artery arises within the cranial cavity from the vertebral artery about 1–2 cm before the
formation of the basilar artery (Fig. 8.7). It passes laterally
from the vertebral artery, follows the contour of the medulla
oblongata to pass between the rootlets of cranial nerves IX
and X and divides into a medial and a lateral branch. The
medial branch supplies the medial aspect of the cerebellar
hemispheres, whereas the lateral branch serves the inferior
aspect of the cerebellum and anastomoses with the anterior
inferior cerebellar artery and the superior cerebellar artery.
Additional branches of the posterior inferior cerebellar artery
supply the choroid plexus of the fourth ventricle as well as
the medulla oblongata.
Several small branches of the cranial portion of the vertebral
artery, known as the medullary branches, serve the medulla oblongata. It should be noted that this important region
is also served by the posterior inferior cerebellar artery
(as indicated in the above paragraph), as well as by the
anterior and posterior spinal arteries.
The basilar artery, formed
by the fusion of the right and
left vertebral arteries, lies in
a shallow groove in the midline of the pons, extending
from the rostral end of the pyramids to the rostral end of the
pons (Fig. 8.7). It has several small branches, the pontine and
labyrinthine arteries, and three larger branches, the anterior
inferior cerebellar, superior cerebellar, and posterior cerebral
arteries (Table 8.6).
The several small pontine arteries arise at right angles to the
basilar artery and serve the pons and the midbrain, penetrating deep into the substance of these two regions.
The labyrinthine (internal auditory) artery is larger than
the pontine arteries and originates somewhat rostral to the
anterior inferior cerebellar artery (from which it occasionally
arises). It reaches and enters the internal auditory meatus in
the company of cranial nerves VII and VIII, and supplies the
internal ear.
The anterior inferior cerebellar artery arises from the basilar
artery just rostral to the pyramids and follows cranial nerve
VI for a short distance. It loops around cranial nerves VII and
VIII, just before they enter the internal acoustic meatus.
Shortly before reaching the cerebellopontine angle, the artery
gives rise to small pontine branches that pierce the lateral
aspect of the pons. At the cerebellopontine angle the anterior
inferior cerebellar artery bifurcates into medial and lateral
branches that serve the anteromedial and anterolateral
aspects of the cerebellum, respectively. The branches of the
anterior inferior cerebellar artery anastomose with branches
of the posterior inferior cerebellar artery and with those of the
superior cerebellar artery.
The superior cerebellar artery originates just caudal to the
third cranial nerve. It curves around the cerebral peduncle to
gain the superior surface of the cerebellum, which it vascularizes, and as it arborizes its branches provide vascular supply
to the pineal body, the midbrain, and the choroid plexus of
the third ventricle. Branches of the superior cerebellar artery
anastomose with branches of the anterior inferior cerebellar
artery.
The right and left posterior cerebral arteries are the terminal
branches of the basilar artery (Fig. 8.7). Each originates just
rostral to the superior cerebellar artery and follows the
course of that vessel as they both curve around the cerebral
peduncle. It should be noted that the third cranial nerve is
located between the posterior cerebral and superior cerebellar arteries. The posterior cerebral artery is connected to the
internal carotid artery by the posterior communicating
artery, forming the posterior limb of the cerebral arterial circle. Branches of the posterior cerebral artery are the cortical,
central, and posterior choroidal arteries.
The cortical branches of the posterior cerebral artery vascularize the medial aspect of the temporal and occipital lobes.
They are usually four in number: the anterior and posterior
temporal, parieto-occipital, and occipital (calcarine) branches.
The anterior temporal branch serves the uncus and parahippocampal gyrus; the posterior temporal branch vascularizes
the lateral and medial occipitotemporal gyri; the parietooccipital branch serves the cuneate and precuneate gyri; and
the occipital (calcarine) branch follows the calcarine sulcus to
serve the lingual and cuneate gyri of the primary visual cortex.
The central branches of the posterior cerebral artery are
classified into two divisions: the thalamic and mesencephalic
(as well as the circumflex mesencephalic) branches.
The thalamic branches, supplying regions of the thalamus and hypothalamus, are divided into the anterior and
posterior thalamic branches, where the anterior thalamic
branches serve the optic tract, the mammillary bodies, and
the anterior and ventromedial nuclei of the thalamus. The
posterior thalamic branches vascularize the posterior thalamic nuclei and the geniculate bodies.
The mesencephalic and circumflex mesencephalic
branches serve the cerebral peduncles, the interpeduncular
region, the corticospinal tracts, the mesencephalic reticular
formation, the substantia nigra, and the tegmentum of the
midbrain.
There are at least two posterior choroidal arteries—the lateral choroidal and medial choroidal arteries. The lateral
choroidal branches serve the choroid plexus of the lateral
ventricle as well as the lateral geniculate body, the pulvinar,
and the dorsomedial nucleus of the thalamus. The medial
choroidal branches serve the choroid plexus of the third ventricle as well as the pineal body, the superior and inferior colliculi, the dorsal medial nucleus of the thalamus, and in many
cases even vascularize the pulvinar, where they anastomose
with the lateral choroidal branches.
As described above, the cerebral arterial circle connects
the branches of the two
internal carotid arteries to
the branches of the two vertebral arteries, forming a method
of shunting blood from one side to the other in case of a
blockage in any one of the vessels (Figs 8.8–8.10). The
anterior communicating artery forms the anterior connection and the posterior communicating artery forms the
posterior connection between the right and left sides. The
arteries involved in the circle are: the right internal
carotid, right anterior cerebral, anterior communicating,
left anterior cerebral, left internal carotid, left posterior
communicating, left posterior cerebral, right posterior
cerebral, right posterior communicating, and back to the
right internal carotid. The major vessels arising from the
anterior, lateral, and posterior aspects of the cerebral arterial
circle supply the cerebrum (via the anterior, middle, and
posterior cerebral arteries). The arterial circle lies inferior to
the hypothalamus and encompasses the mammillary bodies,
infundibulum, optic chiasma, and tuber cinereum, among
other structures.
Blood from these thin-walled
veins reaches the dural venous
sinuses via vessels that penetrate both the arachnoid and
the meningeal layer of the
dura mater. The dural venous sinuses are discussed in
Chapter 7.
The cerebral veins are subdivided into two categories: the
external veins, which drain the superficial aspect of the cerebrum, and the internal veins, which drain the deep regions of
the cerebrum (Figs 8.11–8.13).
There are three external veins, the superior, superficial middle, and inferior cerebral veins. The 15 or so superior cerebral
veins are lodged mostly in the sulci, though they occasionally
pass along the surface of the gyri. These vessels drain blood
from the medial and superolateral aspects of the cerebrum
and empty into the superior sagittal sinus. The superficial
middle cerebral vein is located within the lateral fissure (of
Sylvius) and drains blood from the lateral aspect of the cerebral hemisphere. It delivers its blood into the superior sagittal
sinus by way of the superior anastomotic vein, into the transverse sinus, via the inferior anastomotic vein, and continues
posteriorly until it reaches, and empties into, the cavernous
sinus. The small inferior cerebral veins drain blood from the
inferior aspect of the cerebrum and deliver it into the superior
sagittal sinus by way of the superior cerebral veins. The
inferior cerebral veins that drain blood from the inferior aspect
of the temporal lobe deliver their blood into the cavernous,
transverse, sphenoparietal, and superior petrosal sinuses, via
the basal and middle cerebral veins.
The internal veins drain structures deeper within the brain
and are composed of the great cerebral vein and their tributaries as well as the basal vein. The great cerebral vein, a
short vessel formed by the union of the right and left internal
cerebral veins, drains into the straight sinus in common with
the inferior sagittal sinus. The great cerebral vein receives
blood from its tributaries that drain the thalamus, hypothalamus, basal ganglia, and midbrain.
The thalamostriate vein receives tributaries that drain the
region of the thalamus and corpus striatum, whereas the
choroid vein follows the choroid plexus of the lateral ventricle and receives tributaries from the fornix, hippocampus,
and corpus callosum. At the level of the interventricular foramen (of Monro) the choroid vein joins the thalamostriate
vein to form the internal cerebral vein, which, shortly after receiving the basal vein, joins its counterpart from the other
side to form the great cerebral vein.
The basal vein, formed by its three tributaries at the anterior perforated substance, the anterior cerebral vein, the deep
middle cerebral vein, and the inferior striate veins, receives
blood from the parahippocampal gyrus, interpeduncular
fossa, midbrain, and lateral ventricle. The superior cerebellar veins drain the superior region of
the cerebellum and empty into the straight sinus, the great
cerebral vein, and the transverse and superior petrosal
sinuses. The inferior cerebellar veins drain the inferior aspect
of the cerebellum and empty into the occipital, superior
petrosal, and transverse sinuses.
The veins of the brainstem drain the medulla, pons, and midbrain by forming a superficial plexus of veins. These vessels
deliver their blood to the vertebral veins, the veins of the
spinal cord, and the basilar and inferior petrosal sinuses, as
well as into the basal and great cerebral veins.
Aneurysms are local dilation or ballooning of a vessel due to the weakening
of its wall. The most common location for an aneurysm in the brain is the
posterior communicating artery as it originates from the internal carotid artery.
The largest of the slender striate arteries (lenticulostriate arteries) is frequently known as the artery of cerebral hemorrhage because its aneurysm
is the most likely source of strokes in hypertensive patients. This vessel, a
branch of the middle cerebral artery, passes between the external capsule and
the lentiform nucleus and penetrates as deep as the caudate nucleus.
The brain receives approximately 750 mL of blood per minute from the right
and left internal carotid arteries and from the basilar artery, where each of the
three vessels supplies about the same volume of blood flow. This volume translates to about 55 mL of cerebral blood flow per minute per 100 g of brain
tissue. Ischemia occurs if this blood flow is less than 35 mL/min/100 g of
brain tissue, whereas a blood flow of below 15 mL/min/100 g of brain tissue
for 5 minutes or longer is considered to be an infarct resulting in the death of
brain tissue. The infarct may also be due to complete cessation of blood flow
because of hemorrhage, thrombosis, embolism, or vasospasm.
Due to the specificity of the blood–brain barrier, certain drugs, antibiotics,
and neurotransmitters, such as dopamine, are unable to penetrate the barrier.
In order to facilitate the entry of therapeutic substances, a hypertonic solution
of mannitol is administered which temporarily disables the fasciae occludentes of the capillary endothelial cells. Additionally, it is possible to couple
antibodies that have been developed against capillary endothelial cell transferrin receptors, to the drugs that need to be administered. The antibody
permits the transport of the drug–antibody complex across the blood–brain
barrier and into the CNS.
A stroke (also known as a cerebrovascular accident) is a very serious event
that results in irreversible damage to a region of the brain whose blood supply
has been compromised to such an extent that the involved region can no
longer be perfused adequately. The neurons of the region do not receive
enough oxygen to sustain them and they die. The severity of the stroke is a
function of the region involved and the extent of the damage, therefore the
effect may range from minimal damage to death. In the USA, stroke is the third
most common cause of death, preceded only by heart disease and cancer.
Stroke has numerous risk factors, some of which, such as cigarette smoking
and hypertension, can be controlled with relative ease, whereas other factors,
such as family history and heart disease, cannot be controlled. There are two
types of stroke, ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke. Approximately 85% of all
stroke cases are due to ischemic stroke, which is the result of embolism of
one of the cerebral arteries, vascular disease, or anomalies of the coagulation
process. It has been shown that 15–20% of the patients with ischemic stroke
die within 30 days of the event. Hemorrhagic stroke, which involves bleeding
either into the meninges or the brain tissue, has a much higher mortality rate,
with 40–80% of patients dying within 30 days.
The lateral medullary syndrome, also known as the posterior inferior
cerebellar artery (PICA) syndrome, involves occlusion of the branches of the
vertebral artery or, less commonly, of the PICA. It is the most commonly
occurring brainstem stroke and it has a very good recovery rate. The symptoms
of the lateral medullary syndrome include miosis, ptosis, vertigo, dysarthria,
and ipsilateral hemiataxia.
Basilar artery thrombosis is a very serious stroke that involves loss of vascular supply to much of the brainstem, resulting in quadriplegia and frequently in
death due to respiratory failure.
This patient has had a stroke. It
is in the distribution of the middle
cerebral artery (MCA) on the left. The
MCA is a common target for stroke; it is
sometimes in the full distribution of the
MCA, but more commonly only part of
it is affected. Some symptoms that are
characteristic of MCA territory strokes
include hemiparesis and/or hemisensory
loss (contralateral), aphasia (usually
only if the left MCA is affected), and
sometimes hemineglect (contralateral,
especially with right MCA stroke). This
patient exhibits aphasia and hemiparesis.
Some information cannot be ascertained
in aphasic patients since they cannot talk
about their symptoms.
The two common etiologies of strokes
are embolism and cerebral thrombosis.
Emboli commonly arise from a cardiac
source. A thrombus forms within the
heart and a piece or pieces break off,
travel downstream, and become lodged
within one or more cerebral arteries. A
thrombus can also form within a cerebral
artery, or one of the arteries leading to
the brain (e.g., carotid). The blockage can
lead to a reduction of blood flow that, if
severe enough and prolonged, leads to
infarction.
This patient had an urgent head CT
(to rule out hemorrhage). Other testing
would include carotid ultrasound or cerebral magnetic resonance angiography
(MRA) to look at the appropriate arterial
circulation, and echocardiogram. Cardiac
thrombus is often prompted by atrial
fibrillation, so it would be important to
monitor the cardiac rhythm. Treatment
for stroke includes intravenous tissue
plasminogen activator if it can be started
within 3 hours of the stroke onset, intraarterial thrombolysis if given within 6
hours of onset, carotid endarterectomy if
there is severe carotid stenosis from the
thrombus (this will only help prevent
future strokes), aspirin or similar
medications, or heparin.
A 55-year-old man presents
with generalized weakness and
fatigue. This had been ongoing for the
past year. He also notes a dry mouth
and dry, irritated eyes. He admits to
impotence. There is some mild
constipation. He has been a heavy
smoker since he was 15 years old.
On examination there is mild to
moderate weakness noted in the proximal
muscles of the arms and legs. He has
difficulty rising from a chair without the
help of his arms. There is no sensory
abnormality and his reflexes are normal.
His blood pressure when supine is 150/90
and his heart rate is 80. When standing
the blood pressure is 118/76 and the heart
rate is 78.
The cells constituting the autonomic nervous system, located
in both the central and peripheral nervous systems, innervate
smooth muscles, cardiac muscles, and glands. They perform
their functions below the conscious levels. Functionally,
there are three components to the autonomic nervous system, namely sympathetic, parasympathetic, and enteric.
Although it is usually treated as a motor system—the general
visceral efferent (GVE) system—the autonomic nervous system does possess afferent components. As a generalization it
may be stated that the sympathetic nervous system functions
in “fight or flight,” the parasympathetic nervous system functions in “digest and rest,” whereas the enteric nervous system
functions in “overseeing the digestive process.”
It is important to note from the outset that there are major
differences in the neuronal arrangement of the somatic motor
nervous system and the motor limb of the autonomic nervous
system (Figs 9.1, 9.2). In the somatic nervous system the cell
body of the lower motoneuron is located in the ventral horn
of the spinal cord. The axon of that neuron leaves the spinal
cord via the ventral rootlets and passes directly to the muscle
fibers it is destined to innervate. Thus, only a single neuron is
required to relay the signal for muscle contraction. In the
autonomic nervous system two neurons are required to effect
a contraction of smooth muscle or cardiac muscle, or to elicit
secretion from the cell of a gland. The nerve cell body of the
first neuron is in the central nervous system (CNS), whereas
the nerve cell body of the second neuron is in a ganglion
in the peripheral nervous system. Because the second nerve
cell body resides in an autonomic ganglion, that nerve cell
is referred to as the postganglionic neuron (postsynaptic
neuron), whereas the first neuron in this two neuron chain, is
known as the preganglionic neuron (presynaptic neuron).
The axon of the preganglionic neuron, the preganglionic
fiber, is myelinated and it synapses with the postganglionic
neuron’s soma. The axon of the postganglionic neuron, the
postganglionic fiber, is not myelinated.
It should be realized that somatic sensory ganglia do not
have synapses, whereas synapses do occur in autonomic
ganglia. As a generalization, it may be stated that the length
of preganglionic and postganglionic fibers differ in that in the
sympathetic nervous system the preganglionic fibers are
short and the postganglionic fibers are long. In the parasympathetic nervous system the opposite is usually true, in
that the preganglionic parasympathetic fibers are long and
the postganglionic parasympathetic fibers are usually short.
The neurotransmitter substance at the parasympathetic preganglionic and postganglionic and sympathetic
preganglionic synapse is acetylcholine, whereas at the
sympathetic postganglionic synapse it is norepinephrine
(noradrenaline). The only exception to this rule is that the
postganglionic sympathetic fibers serving the eccrine sweat
glands release acetylcholine. In addition to the primary
neurotransmitter, co-transmitters are also usually released.
The fibers of the sensory (or afferent) limb of the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems travel with
blood vessels, cranial nerves, and visceral motor fibers. They
frequently pass through but do not synapse in the autonomic
ganglia. Instead their cell bodies (unipolar/pseudounipolar)
are located in the sensory ganglia of the cranial and spinal
nerves.
The soma of the preganglionic neurons of the sympathetic
nervous system are located in the lateral cell column of
spinal cord levels T1 to L2,3 (Fig. 9.2). Since the axons of these
neurons exit the vertebral canal in the ventral root of the
spinal nerve at the levels of their origin, the sympathetic nervous system is also known as the thoracolumbar outflow.
The cell bodies of the postganglionic sympathetic neurons
reside in the sympathetic chain ganglia (paravertebral ganglia located on either side of the vertebral column), the pelvic
ganglia, the preaortic ganglia, and the small renal ganglia
(Fig. 9.3). Some of the functions of the sympathetic nervous
system are given in Table (9.1). Preganglionic fibers (preganglionic efferent axons)
enter the spinal nerve via 
the ventral rootlets; they subsequently leave the spinal
nerve via 14 pairs of small branches, known as white rami
communicantes (white because the axons are myelinated) to
reach one of the sympathetic chain ganglia. Once preganglionic sympathetic fibers have entered the chain ganglion
they have one of three options (Figs 9.4, 9.5):
1 To form synapses with postganglionic, sympathetic soma
in the chain ganglion at the level of entry.
2 To proceed superiorly or inferiorly in the sympathetic
chain and synapse in a ganglion above or below the point
of entry. This may be as far superiorly as the cervical level
or as far inferiorly as the sacral level.
3 To pass through the chain ganglion without synapsing
in any of the paravertebral ganglia, joining with other
preganglionic fibers to form the greater, lesser, or least
splanchnic nerves to synapse in one of the prevertebral
sympathetic chain ganglia, specifically the pelvic, renal,
or preaortic ganglia.
The paravertebral ganglia in the neck fuse to form
three ganglia, the largest of which is the superior cervical
ganglion, the smaller middle cervical ganglion, and the
smallest inferior cervical ganglion. Quite often the inferior
cervical ganglion fuses with the first thoracic sympathetic
chain ganglion to form the enlarged stellate ganglion. The
caudal-most ganglia of the right and left paravertebral chains
fuse with each other in the coccygeal region, thus forming the
unpaired ganglion impar.
The postganglionic fibers
(axons of the postganglionic
soma) arise from the sympathetic chain ganglia and
are distributed as branches to
the spinal nerves or cranial
nerves, or they may travel wrapped around arteries, or they
may proceed directly to specific organs or to autonomic
plexuses (Fig. 9.4).
1 Branches to spinal nerves re-enter the spinal nerve
through connections known as gray rami communicantes (gray because the postganglionic axons are
unmyelinated). Unlike white rami communicantes, there
re 31 pairs of gray rami communicantes, one for each
spinal nerve. The postganglionic sympathetic fibers are
distributed with the cutaneous branches of the spinal
nerves, reaching the sweat glands, arrector pili muscles,
and smooth muscles of peripheral blood vessels.
2 Branches to cranial nerves may reach the cranial nerves
directly, namely, the glossopharyngeal (CN IX), vagus
(CN X), and hypoglossal (CN XII) nerves or they may
follow blood vessels until they are in the vicinity of the
cranial nerve that they use to reach their final destination.
3 Branches wrapped around arteries travel with these
vessels, such as the internal and external carotid arteries
and the vertebral artery. There are numerous other
arteries that possess postganglionic sympathetic fibers
in their tunicae adventitia and they are discussed below.
4 Branches proceeding directly to specific organs may
travel on arteries, in nerves, or through plexuses, but they
travel on their own, at least for a while. These include
postganglionic sympathetic fibers destined for the eyes
and the heart.
5 Branches that proceed to autonomic plexuses possess
either postganglionic or preganglionic fibers, depending
on the plexus. Those that serve the heart, lungs, and pelvis
are probably postganglionic, whereas those that are
destined for the abdominal plexuses are preganglionic
sympathetic fibers destined for the postganglionic soma
in the walls of the organ to be innervated. The greater,
lesser, and least splanchnic nerves are the major nerve
fibers that contain preganglionic sympathetic axons
destined for the abdominal plexuses.
The sympathetic nervous system may be subdivided into
two categories: (i) those associated with the chain ganglia; and
(ii) a collection of autonomic plexuses whose postganglionic
fibers are distributed to the abdominal and pelvic viscera.
The chain ganglia, although a single entity, may be viewed as
being composed of five discrete regions that correspond to
the head, neck, thorax, abdominolumbar region, and pelvis.
The cephalic region of the sympathetic nervous system has
no ganglia of its own, instead it is composed only of postganglionic sympathetic fibers whose cell bodies are located
in the superior cervical ganglia. These fibers are primarily
associated with the tunica adventitia of blood vessels passing
from the neck into the head, are named according to their
vessel of association or by their location, or by the localized
region that they serve.
The internal carotid nerves travel with the internal carotid
arteries as two separate plexuses, the internal carotid plexus
and the cavernous plexus.
The internal carotid plexus travels on the lateral aspect of
the artery and has the following branches:
• Branches communicating with cranial nerve V (trigeminal nerve) and cranial nerve VI (abducent nerve).
• The deep petrosal nerve: this pierces the cartilage of the
foramen lacerum and accompanies the greater petrosal
nerve as the two nerves enter the pterygoid canal to form
the nerve of the pterygoid canal (vidian canal). This
nerve proceeds to the pterygopalatine ganglion in the
same named fossa. Some branches derived from the
greater petrosal nerve synapse in the pterygopalatine
ganglion, but none of the branches derived from the deep
petrosal nerve synapse (since they are postganglionic
sympathetic fibers), instead they become distributed by
branches of the maxillary division of the trigeminal nerve
to the glands and blood vessels of the pharynx, palate,
and nasal cavity.
• The caroticotympanic nerves: these are small fibers that
are destined to serve regions of the middle ear.
The cavernous plexus travels on the medial aspect of the
artery and has the following branches:
• Branches communicating with cranial nerve IV
(trochlear nerve) and cranial nerve V1 (ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve).
• Branches destined for the dilator pupillae muscle of the
iris. These travel with the long ciliary nerve as well as
with the short ciliary nerves (without synapsing in the
ciliary ganglion) to pierce the orb and synapse on the
muscle fibers.
• Branches serving the vessels of the pituitary gland, brain,
meninges, and orbit.
The external carotid nerves, composed of postganglionic
sympathetic fibers derived from the superior cervical ganglion, travel with the external carotid artery and its branches
in the head. These include the following:
• Nerve fibers that follow the facial artery: these travel to
and serve the submandibular gland and, using the lingual
nerve, reach and serve the sublingual gland.
• Nerve fibers that travel on branches of the facial and
superficial temporal arteries, serving them as well as
arrector pili muscles and sweat glands of the facial region.
• The small deep petrosal nerve: this leaves the middle
meningeal artery to pass through (without synapsing in)
the otic ganglion. It joins the auriculotemporal nerve and
serves the parotid gland.
The cervical region of the sympathetic trunk is composed
of the superior, middle, and inferior sympathetic cervical
ganglia as well as the sympathetic cord that connects them to
each other. None of these receive white rami communicantes
because the preganglionic fibers enter the chain ganglia at
thoracic levels T1–T5, and proceed superiorly in the cord to
reach and synapse on postganglionic soma residing in one
of the three ganglia. Postganglionic fibers leave the ganglia
gathered in nerves of various caliber that join the arteries, cervical spinal nerves, and cranial nerves. Branches are derived
from each cervical ganglion and are detailed below.
The superior cervical ganglion, the largest of the three ganglia, is located deep to the carotid sheath, at the level of the
atlas. It has numerous branches, some of which (internal and
external carotid nerves) were detailed in the section above
(see p. 124). The additional branches are those that travel with
the cranial nerves and cervical spinal nerves, the pharyngeal
branches, the intercarotid plexus, and the superior cardiac
nerves:
• Branches traveling with cranial nerves IX, X, and XII.
• Branches traveling with the first four cervical nerves.
• The four to six pharyngeal branches that form the pharyngeal plexus in unison with cranial nerves IX and X.
• The intercarotid plexus that proceeds to the carotid sinus
and carotid body to innervate the smooth muscle of the
regional blood vessels.
• The superior cardiac nerves of the right and left side:
these join the cardiac plexus and innervate the cardiac
muscle of the heart. They function in concert with the
middle and inferior cardiac nerves to accelerate the rate of
heart beat.
The smallest of the ganglia, the middle cervical ganglion,
has an inconstant location and is occasionally absent. The
branches arising from the middle cervical ganglion are those
that join the cervical spinal nerves, the middle cervical nerve,
and the thyroid nerves:
• Gray rami communicantes to the fifth and sixth cervical
nerves that are distributed with the branches of these
cervical nerves.
• The middle cardiac nerve, also known as the great cardiac
nerve: this communicates with the superior cardiac nerve
to join the cardiac plexus. It functions, in concert with the
superior and inferior cardiac nerves, to accelerate the rate
of the heart beat.
• The thyroid nerves: these travel on the tunica adventitia
of the inferior thyroid artery to reach and supply the
thyroid gland.
• The region of the sympathetic cord connecting the
middle and inferior cervical ganglia. This is usually split
into an anterior and a posterior portion; the anterior
portion passes around the subclavian artery, forming a
loop—the ansa subclavia.
The inferior cervical ganglion is located at the level of
the transverse process of the 7th cervical vertebra. The
branches arising from the inferior cervical ganglion are the
ones that join the cervical spinal nerves, the inferior cardiac
nerves, and the vertebral nerve:
• Gray rami communicantes to cervical spinal nerves 6–8:
these are distributed with the branches of these cervical
nerves.
• Inferior cardiac nerves: these join the cardiac plexus
and function, in concert with the superior and middle
cardiac nerves, to accelerate the rate of heart beat.
• Vertebral nerve: this travels on the tunica adventitia
of the vertebral artery and serves it as well as its intracranial branches with vasomotor function.
The inferior cervical and first thoracic ganglia frequently
fuse to form the stellate ganglion. This fused ganglion fulfills
all the functions of the inferior cervical ganglion and also
gives rise to the gray rami communicantes of spinal nerves T1
and T2.
Theoretically, there are 12 thoracic sympathetic ganglia
connected to each other by short segments of the sympathetic cord, but fusion of occasional ganglia with each
other reduces their number to approximately 10. White rami
communicantes are connections between the thoracic spinal
nerves and the thoracic chain ganglia. They carry preganglionic sympathetic fibers from the lateral column of the spinal
cord, which enter each thoracic sympathetic ganglion to
synapse with postganglionic sympathetic soma residing in
a sympathetic ganglion at any level of the chain ganglia or
in a sympathetic ganglion located elsewhere in the body.
Branches arising from the thoracic sympathetic ganglia
are the gray rami communicantes, the visceral branches, and
the splanchnic nerves.
The gray rami communicantes arise from each thoracic
ganglion to unite with their associated thoracic spinal nerve,
carrying postganglionic sympathetic fibers that will be
distributed with the branches of the spinal nerve.
The visceral branches are composed of postganglionic sympathetic fibers that are distributed to plexuses on or in the
vicinity of the heart, esophagus, lungs, and aorta:
• Cardiac branches arise from the first through fifth thoracic ganglia and are destined for the cardiac plexus. They
mix with fibers from the superior, middle, and inferior
cardiac nerves. They also function in accelerating the rate
of the heart beat.
• Esophageal branches arise from many of the thoracic
ganglia and serve to modify the function of the enteric
nervous system.
• Fibers destined for the pulmonary plexus arise from the
second through fourth thoracic ganglia and enter the
hilum of the lung. They serve the blood vessels of the lung
as well as the bronchial musculature.
• The aortic plexus is served by fibers arising from the
fifth to tenth (or eleventh) thoracic ganglia. These fibers
distribute with the branches of the aorta and probably
function to modulate the enteric nervous system.
The splanchnic nerves are composed of mostly myelinated
preganglionic sympathetic fibers (as well as large myelinated
visceral afferent fibers bringing information from the viscera), because they have not synapsed in the chain ganglia;
instead they passed through the ganglia on their way to the
preaortic ganglia. There are three splanchnic nerves: the
greater, lesser, and least splanchnic nerves.
1 The greater splanchnic nerves, formed into a single trunk
from preganglionic sympathetic fibers that pass through
the fifth to ninth thoracic ganglia, penetrate the crus of
the diaphragm to synapse in the celiac ganglion (and
splanchnic ganglion, if present). Some fibers continue
through the celiac ganglion without synapsing, and continue to the suprarenal gland medulla and synapse there
on chromaffin cells.
It is interesting to note that the chromaffin cells of the
suprarenal medulla, as well as the neurons of sympathetic
ganglia, are derived from neural crest cells. Thus chromaffin cells act as modified postganglionic sympathetic
neurons and release their secretory product, epinephrine
and norepinephrine, into the capillary beds of the
suprarenal medulla. Approximately 85% of the chromaffin cells release epinephrine and 15% release norepinephrine.
2 The lesser splanchnic nerve, formed into a single trunk
from preganglionic sympathetic fibers that pass through
the tenth and eleventh thoracic ganglia, penetrates the
crus of the diaphragm and synapses in the aorticorenal
ganglion.
3 The least splanchnic nerve, formed from preganglionic
sympathetic fibers that pass through the twelfth thoracic
ganglion, passes through the diaphragm and synapses in
the renal plexus.
The abdominolumbar sympathetic trunk is highly variable
in that there are two to six ganglia, with an average of
four ganglia, connected to one another by cords of varying
lengths. The right and left sympathetic trunks in the abdominal cavity are almost hidden by the inferior vena cava and
the abdominal aorta, respectively. Branches of the abdominolumbar trunk are composed of gray rami communicantes,
lumbar splanchnic nerves, and branches of the celiac
ganglion:
• Gray rami communicantes in the lumbar area are somewhat longer than those of the thoracic region. They join
the spinal nerves to be distributed with them to innervate
the smooth muscle of blood vessels as well as the glands
and arrector pili of the skin.
• Lumbar splanchninc nerves, preganglionic sympathetic
fibers that are located caudal to the least splanchnic nerve,
synapse in the inferior mesenteric ganglion.
• Branches of the celiac ganglion are postganglionic
sympathetic fibers that follow the aorta and its branches
and form a large plexus of nerve fibers, the celiac
plexus.
The preganglionic cell bodies of the parasympathetic nervous system are located in cranial nerves as well as in the
lateral horn of the sacral spinal cord. Therefore, the parasympathetic nervous system is also referred to as the craniosacral
outflow. Some of the functions of the parasympathetic
nervous system are given in Table (9.2).
The preganglionic parasympathetic fibers of the cranial
portion of the parasympathetic nervous system travel
with four cranial nerves,
the oculomotor, facial, glossopharyngeal, and vagus nerves (Figs 9.6, 9.7).
The Edinger–Westphal nucleus houses preganglionic
parasympathetic soma whose axons travel in the branches of
cranial nerve III. When these preganglionic fibers reach the
orbit they synapse with postganglionic parasympathetic soma
in the ciliary ganglion (the parasympathetic ganglion of the
oculomotor nerve). The postganglionic parasympathetic fibers,
known as the short ciliary nerves, exit the ciliary ganglion,
pierce the orb (eyeball) to innervate the sphincter pupillae
muscle, which constricts the pupils. They also innervate the
muscles of the ciliary body, which function in accommodating the lens of the eye when focusing on nearby objects.
The lacrimal and superior salivatory nuclei of the brainstem
house the preganglionic parasympathetic soma associated
with cranial nerve VII.
Preganglionic parasympathetic fibers from the lacrimal
nucleus reach the pterygopalatine ganglion (a parasympathetic ganglion of the facial nerve) where they synapse
with postganglionic parasympathetic soma. Postganglionic
parasympathetic fibers leave the ganglion and serve the
lacrimal gland, eliciting the production of tears, as well as
glands in the nasal mucosa, eliciting the production of
mucus.
Preganglionic parasympathetic fibers from the superior
salivatory nucleus proceed to the submandibular ganglion
where they synapse with postganglionic parasympathetic
soma. Postganglionic parasympathetic fibers leave the ganglion to innervate the submandibular and sublingual glands,
eliciting the flow of saliva.
The inferior salivatory nucleus (nucleus of the glossopharyngeal nerve) of the brainstem houses the preganglionic
parasympathetic cell bodies associated with cranial nerve
IX. Preganglionic parasympathetic fibers from this nucleus
reach the otic ganglion to synapse with postganglionic
parasympathetic soma. Their postganglionic parasympathetic fibers leave the ganglion to innervate the parotid gland
as well as minor salivary glands in the oral mucosa, eliciting
the flow of saliva.
The nucleus ambiguus and the dorsal motor nucleus of the
vagus nerve house the preganglionic parasympathetic soma
associated with cranial nerve X.
Preganglionic parasympathetic nerve fibers from the
nucleus ambiguus synapse with postganglionic parasympathetic soma located in the cardiac ganglia distributed around
the great vessels of the heart. Postganglionic parasympathetic axons leave the ganglia and innervate the sinoatrial
(SA) node. Additionally these fibers also serve occasional
atrial and ventricular cardiac muscle fibers. The parasympathetic nervous system decreases the rate of the heart beat.
Preganglionic parasympathetic nerve fibers from the dorsal
motor nucleus of the vagus synapse with the following soma:
• Postganglionic parasympathetic soma located in ganglia
surrounding the bronchial passages. Postganglionic
parasympathetic fibers derived from these ganglia serve
to elicit bronchioconstriction.
• Postganglionic parasympathetic soma located in the
vicinity of the pancreas. Postganglionic parasympathetic
fibers derived from these ganglia serve to elicit the release
of pancreatic enzymes and buffer.
• Postganglionic parasympathetic soma along the gastrointestinal tract extending from the esophagus to the end
of the transverse colon. These postganglionic parasympathetic cell bodies are housed in Meissner’s submucosal
and Auerbach’s myenteric plexus (ganglia) located
within the wall of the alimentary canal. Moreover, many
of the preganglionic parasympathetic axons synapse with
the intrinsic soma of the enteric nervous system. Parasympathetic activity facilitates the digestive process and
relaxes sphincter muscles.
The lateral cell column of
the second to fourth segments of the sacral spinal
cord houses the preganglionic parasympathetic cell
bodies composing the sacral
division of the parasympathetic nervous system. Their preganglionic axons join their corresponding spinal nerves and
travel to the pelvic plexus and to scattered small ganglia in
the vicinity of the pelvic organs, where they synapse with the
enteric nervous system and with postganglionic cell bodies
of the parasympathetic ganglia. Postganglionic parasympathetic fibers from the pelvic plexus and the additional small
ganglia serve the urinary bladder, penis, prostate, and seminal vesicles in the male as well as the bladder, uterus, clitoris,
and vagina in the female.
The bladder, prostate, and seminal vesicles receive their
motor innervation from the small ganglia in their vicinity,
except for the sphincter muscle controlling the bladder,
which is inhibited by the parasympathetic nervous system.
The uterus and vagina receive inhibitory postganglionic
parasympathetic fibers via the uterovaginal plexus. Although in the pregnant female the same fibers are believed to
have excitatory roles.
The external genitalia of the male and the clitoris of the
female receive postganglionic parasympathetic fibers from
the pelvic plexus via the pudendal nerve; these fibers are
responsible for dilation of the cavernous blood sinuses resulting in the erection of the penis and clitoris.
Meissner’s submucosal
plexus and Auerbach’s
myenteric plexus house the
intrinsic components of the
enteric nervous system.
The neurons and neuroglial
cells of the enteric nervous system originate from neural
crest cells.
Meissner’s submucosal plexus is located in the submucosa at its interface with the inner circular layer of the
muscularis externa. Generally speaking, Meissner’s submucosal plexus is responsible for peristalsis and global, rather
than local, actions. Auerbach’s myenteric plexus is located
between the inner circular and outer longitudinal layers of
the muscularis externa. Generally speaking, Auerbach’s
plexus is responsible for localized phenomena and for movement of, and glandular secretions from, the mucosa.
The two sets of plexuses interact with the sympathetic and
parasympathetic nervous systems as well as with each other
and function together to ensure that the alimentary canal performs its functions properly.
The extrinsic components of the enteric nervous system
are the sympathetic and parasympathetic fibers that modulate the functioning of the intrinsic components. The extrinsic
components are necessary but not essential for normal functioning of the digestive tract. Parasympathetic innervation
facilitates digestion by increasing peristalsis and relaxing
sphincters. Vigorous activity from the sympathetic innervation slows down peristalsis and increases sphincter muscle
tonus.
The intrinsic components of the enteric nervous system
regulate much of the digestive processes by innervating the
smooth muscles, glands, as well as the diffuse neuroendocrine system (DNES) cells residing in the epithelial lining of
the alimentary canal. There are at least 20 different types of
DNES cells and each releases a specific paracrine hormone
(although many of these hormones also enter the bloodstream
to remote target cells). These hormones act in concert to regulate much of the digestive process. A select list of these cells,
their hormones, and their function is presented in Table (9.3).
Because the two primary neurotransmitters are acetylcholine
and norepinephrine, it is customary to speak of cholinergic
and adrenergic divisions of the autonomic nervous system.
Preganglionic and postganglionic parasympathetic neurons,
preganglionic sympathetic neurons, and those postglanglionic sympathetic neurons that innervate eccrine sweat glands
are all cholinergic. All other postganglionic sympathetic
neurons are adrenergic.
Autonomic receptors are classified as cholinergic or adrenergic (noradrenergic), based on their ability to bind and to be
activated by acetylcholine or norepinephrine, respectively.
Subtypes of both cholinergic and adrenergic receptors have
been identified. Additionally, other types of receptors are
also present.
Muscarinic and nicotinic receptors are the two types of cholinergic receptors
There are two types of cholinergic receptors, namely, muscarinic receptors and nicotinic receptors. The former are also
activated by muscarine, a toxin derived from toadstools, and
the latter are also activated by nicotine. It is important to note
that nicotine will not activate muscarinic receptors and muscarine will not activate nicotinic receptors, but both types will
be activated by acetylcholine.
Muscarinic receptors are located in the membranes of
cells synapsing with postganglionic parasympathetic fibers
and in the membranes of eccrine sweat glands (innervated by
postganglionic sympathetic fibers).
Nicotinic receptors are located in the membranes of
postganglionic sympathetic and postganglionic parasympathetic soma where they synapse with their preganglionic
counterparts. They are also located in the sarcolemma of the
myoneural junctions of skeletal muscle cells.
There are two types of adrenergic receptors, alpha adrenergic
receptors and beta adrenergic receptors, each with its own
subtypes.
Alpha adrenergic receptors are more easily activated by
epinephrine than by norepinephrine and are least activated
by isoproterenol. Alpha receptors are located in the plasma
membranes of vascular smooth muscle cells, dilatator pupillae muscle cells, and soma of enteric neurons controlling
sphincter muscle contraction.
Beta adrenergic receptors are more responsive to isoproterenol than to epinephrine and are least activated by
norepinephrine. Beta receptors are located in the plasma
membranes of cardiac muscle cells, bronchiolar smooth muscle cells, and soma of enteric neurons that facilitate peristaltic
activity of the alimentary canal.
There are additional receptors, especially in the enteric
nervous system, that are neither cholinergic nor adrenergic.
These respond to various other neurotransmitter substances,
such as somatostatin, substance P, adenosine, vasoactive
intestinal peptide, etc., many of which are detailed in
Chapter 4.
The somatic and autonomic nervous systems interact with
each other to perform numerous functions, among them
those that control urination, defecation, and erection and
ejaculation.
The process of retaining
urine in, and evacuating
urine from, the urinary bladder is a learned function that
requires the interactions of
the sympathetic, parasympathetic, and somatic motor nervous systems and is controlled by the cerebral cortex and pons. As the urinary
bladder distends, nociceptors and stretch receptors in its wall
transmit the information to the dorsal horn of the spinal cord.
These afferent nerves are unipolar (pseudounipolar) neurons whose cell bodies are located in the dorsal root ganglia.
If the volume of urine in the bladder is low, the skeletal muscles of the external sphincter undergo reflex contraction in
response to stimulation by axons of somatic motoneurons
whose cell bodies are located in the Onuf nucleus (ventral
horn of spinal cord levels S2–S4). Cell bodies of the motor
neurons in the Onuf nucleus are activated by projections
from the pons and cerebral cortex (Fig. 9.8). Concurrently, the
smooth muscle cells of the internal sphincter also undergo
reflex contraction and the detrusor muscles, smooth muscles
located in the wall of the urinary bladder, undergo reflex
relaxation, due to the activities of preganglionic sympathetic
innervation from the intermediate cell column at spinal cord
levels T12 to S2.
The process of urination is facilitated by the micturition
centers located in the cerebral cortex and the pons. As the
bladder distends and the urine volume reaches a threshold
level, sensory information reaches the ventral posterolateral
(VPL) nucleus of the thalamus traveling via the medial lemniscal pathway, the dorsal column, and the anterolateral column. The information is transmitted by tertiary neurons from
the thalamus to the postcentral sulcus and the individual
becomes conscious of the need to urinate. When the individual is ready to void the retentive reflexes described above
become inhibited, thus the internal and external sphincters
relax. Additionally, projections from the pons activate the
preganglionic parasympathetic neurons in the lateral horn of
spinal cord levels S2–S4, whose post-ganglioic counterparts
stimulate the detrusor muscles of the bladder to undergo contraction, thus emptying the urinary bladder.
As feces accumulate, the
sigmoid colon distends and
the individual becomes conscious of the need to defecate, but the feces are retained in the colon by the two
sphincter muscles, the internal smooth muscle sphincter
and the external skeletal muscle sphincter. The former is
supplied by postganglionic sympathetic fibers from the
hypogastric plexus as well as by postganglionic parasympathetic fibers located in Auerbach’s plexus (whose preganglionic fibers arise from the sacral spinal cord). The external
sphincter is supplied by the somatic nervous system, namely
the inferior rectal nerve. Thus, when the sigmoid colon
becomes distended, the internal sphincter muscle relaxes
(due to the parasympathetic nerve supply) and at the same
time the external sphincter muscle contracts, preventing the
feces from exiting the bowel. While the individual is asleep,
this contraction of the external sphincter muscle is a reflex
response. When the individual is awake, the contraction of
the external sphincter is a voluntary response. When the individual is ready to defecate, the voluntary relaxation of the
external sphincter, the peristaltic action of the sigmoid colon,
and the intra-abdominal pressure created by contraction
of the anterior abdominal wall musculature cooperate in
expelling the feces from the sigmoid colon and the rectum
through the anus.
Erection of the penis and of the clitoris is an autonomic function initiated by tactile or psychogenic stimulation and mediated by parasympathetic innervation derived from sacral
spinal cord levels. The parasympathetic fibers are responsible
for engorgement of the spongy tissue of the penis and clitoris
as well as of the vascular channels of the labia minora, and
cause the release of secretions from the vaginal glands, lubricating the vagina. Preganglionic sympathetic fibers from
spinal cord levels T10 to L2 synapse on postganglionic sympathetic nerve cell bodies housed in the inferior mesenteric
ganglion. Postganglionic sympathetic fibers from that ganglion are responsible in females for rhythmic contractions of
the vagina and uterus, and in males for the release of secretions from the prostate gland and seminal vesicles as well as
for ejaculation.
Congenital megacolon, also known as Hirschsprung’s disease, is an excessive enlargement of the distal part of the colon due to the lack of, or a marked
reduction in, the neuronal population in Auerbach’s myenteric plexus. Due to
the absence of these neurons a region of the colon becomes constricted, the
muscles cannot relax, and feces accumulate in the region of the colon proximal
to the constriction. With the accumulation of feces the proximal region
enlarges, resulting in megacolon.
Horner’s syndrome is a condition resulting from damage to the cervical sympathetic trunk, sympathetic fibers of the carotid plexus, or any region
of the spinal cord or brainstem involving the sympathetic pathways. The
syndrome is characterized by the following conditions on the affected side:
constriction of the pupil (miosis), lack of the ability to sweat (anhydrosis),
recession of the orb within the orbit (enophthalmos), and drooping of the
upper eyelid (ptosis). It is interesting to note that cancer of the apex of the
lung may involve the cervical sympathetic trunk, thus precipitating Horner’s
syndrome.
Shy–Drager syndrome patients suffer from orthostatic hypertension and
faint frequently because the autonomic nervous system neurons responsible
for adjusting blood pressure during postural changes have either degenerated
or died. These postural changes can involve the patient standing up from a
reclining (or even from a sitting) position.
Serologic testing confirmed
that this patient had Lambert–
Eaton myasthenic syndrome. This is
an autoimmune condition.
Acetylcholine is released at
presynaptic peripheral nerve terminals
in response to an action potential. The
action potential at the presynaptic
terminal opens voltage-gated calcium
channels, leading to an influx of calcium,
which leads to acetylcholine release.
This acetylcholine diffuses across the
synapse to reach receptors on the target
organ. This is most apparent at the
neuromuscular junction, where an action
potential along the muscle membrane is
induced by the released acetylcholine
from the presynaptic nerve terminal. It
occurs for both autonomic nerves as well
as nerves supplying skeletal muscle, and
the effects are seen at both nicotinic and
muscarinic receptors.
In Lambert–Eaton syndrome
antibodies to the voltage-gated calcium
channels are produced. This reduces
calcium influx at the presynaptic terminal
in response to an action potential,
and acetylcholine release is therefore
impaired. This produces both skeletal
muscle weakness and autonomic
dysfunction. Common autonomic
symptoms include dry mouth, dry
eyes, impotence, heart rate irregularities,
constipation, and orthostatic
hypotension (can cause dizziness).
Both parasympathetic and sympathetic
function can be affected. Most often,
however, it is the muscle weakness and
fatigue that causes the most disability.
Lambert–Eaton syndrome is a
paraneoplastic disorder, meaning it is
often associated with cancer. Small
cell lung cancer is the one most often
associated. The immune system is
induced by an as yet undetermined
mechanism to produce antibodies to
the voltage-gated calcium channel.
Therefore, a cancer work-up should be
undertaken in all patients with this
syndrome. In particular, this patient
needs, at the least, a chest X-ray and/or
chest CT since he has been a heavy
smoker.
Autonomic dysfunction can occur
with many other conditions affecting
acetylcholine release or metabolism.
A major culprit is medication with
anticholinergic effects (there are
many). Botulism, which also reduces
acetylcholine release at the presynaptic
terminal, causes autonomic dysfunction
as well as weakness.
A 60-year-old woman complains of falls, imbalance, and
numbness and tingling in her hands and
legs. There is also some incoordination of
hand use and she has difficulty manipulating small items such as buttons. She is
unable to play the piano now since she
cannot position her fingers correctly on
the piano keys. She thinks the strength in
her arms and legs is adequate. Symptoms
started with very slight tingling sensations, which she noticed about 5 years
ago. The falls and difficulty walking have
been present for about 2 months. Higher
order cognitive functions are intact
according to her husband. Her vision is
normal.
On examination, the patient shows
normal mental status. Strength seems
essentially normal throughout. Sensation,
particularly to vibration and joint position, is severely diminished in the distal
upper and lower limbs (arms, legs, hands,
and feet). Tendon reflexes are normal in
the arms, but somewhat brisk in the legs
at the knees and ankles. Gait is moderately ataxic and she has to reach out for
support by touching the walls of the
hallway at times. Fine movements of
the fingers are performed poorly, even
though finger and wrist strength seems
normal.
A variety of sensory receptors scattered throughout the body
can become activated by exteroceptive, interoceptive, or
proprioceptive input. Exteroceptive input relays sensory
information about the body’s interaction with the external
environment. Interoceptive input relays information about
the body’s internal state, whereas proprioceptive input conveys information about position sense from the body and
its component parts. Each receptor is specialized to detect
mechanical, chemical, nociceptive (L. nocere, “to injure,”
“painful”), or thermal stimuli. Activation of a sensory receptor is converted into nerve impulses and this sensory input is
then conveyed via the fibers of the cranial or spinal nerves to
their respective relay nuclei in the central nervous system
(CNS). The sensory information is then further processed as it
progresses, via the ascending sensory systems (pathways),
to the cerebral cortex or to the cerebellum. Sensory information is also relayed to other parts of the CNS where it may
function to elicit a reflex response, or may be integrated into
pattern-generating circuitry.
The ascending sensory pathways are classified according
to the functional components (modalities) they carry as well
as by their anatomical localization. The two functional categories are the general somatic afferent (GSA) system, which
transmits sensory information such as touch, pressure, vibration, pain, temperature, stretch, and position sense from
somatic structures; and the general visceral afferent (GVA)
system, which transmits sensory information such as pressure,
pain, and other visceral sensation from visceral structures.
Anatomically, the ascending sensory systems consist of
three distinct pathways: the anterolateral system (ALS), the
dorsal column–medial lemniscal (DCML) pathway, and the
somatosensory pathways to the cerebellum.
The anterolateral system, which includes the spinothalamic, spinoreticular, spinomesencephalic, spinotectal, and
spinohypothalamic tracts, relays predominantly pain and
temperature sensation, as well as nondiscriminative (crude
or poorly localized) touch, pressure, and some proprioceptive sensation (Table 10.1).
The dorsal column–medial lemniscal pathway (which
includes the fasciculus gracilis, fasciculus cuneatus, and
medial lemniscus) relays discriminative (fine) tactile sense,
vibratory sense, and position sense (Table 10.1).
The somatosensory pathways to the cerebellum, which
include the anterior, posterior, and rostral spinocerebellar,
as well as the cuneocerebellar tracts, relay primarily proprioceptive (but also some pain and pressure) information
(Table 10.1).
The ascending sensory pathways are the main avenues by
which information concerning the body’s interaction with the
external environment, its internal condition, and the position
and movement of its parts, reach the brain. One similarity
shared by all three ascending sensory pathways from the
body (not including the head or face) is that the first order
neuron cell bodies reside in the dorsal root ganglia. It is
interesting to note that conscious perception of sensory
information from external stimuli is mediated by the
spinothalamic and DCML pathways to the ventral posterior
lateral nucleus of the thalamus, whereas sensations that do
not reach consciousness are mediated by the spinoreticular,
spinomesencephalic, spinotectal, spinohypothalamic, and
the anterior, posterior, and rostral spinocerebellar, and
cuneocerebellar tracts. These tracts terminate in the reticular
formation, mesencephalon, hypothalamus and cerebellum,
respectively.
Sensory input may ultimately elicit a reflex or other
motor response because of the functional integration of the
ascending (somatosensory) pathways, the cerebellum, and
the somatosensory cortex, as well as the motor cortex and
descending (motor) pathways. Furthermore, descending
projections from the somatosensory cortex, as well as from
the raphe nucleus magnus and the dorsolateral pontine
reticular formation to the somatosensory relay nuclei of the
brainstem and spinal cord, modulate the transmission of
incoming sensory impulses to higher brain centers.
This chapter includes a description of the sensory receptors and the ascending sensory pathways from the body,
whereas the ascending sensory pathways from the head,
transmitted mostly by the trigeminal system, are described
in Chapter 15.
Although sensory receptors
vary according to their morphology, the velocity of conduction, and the modality to
which they respond, as well as to their location in the body,
they generally all function in a similar fashion. The stimulus
to which a specific receptor responds causes an alteration in
the ionic permeability of the nerve endings, generating a
receptor potential that results in the formation of action
potentials. This transformation of the stimulus into an electrical signal is referred to as sensory transduction.
Some receptors that respond quickly and maximally at
the onset of the stimulus, but stop responding even if the
stimulus continues, are known as rapidly adapting (phasic)
receptors. These are essential in responding to changes but
they ignore ongoing processes, such as when one wears a
wristwatch and ignores the continuous pressure on the skin
of the wrist. However, there are other receptors, slowly
adapting (tonic) receptors, that continue to respond as long
as the stimulus is present.
Sensory receptors are classified according to the source
of the stimulus or according to the modality to which they
respond. It is important to note that, in general, receptors do
not transmit only one specific sensation.
Receptors that are classified according to the source of the
stimulus are placed in one of the following three categories:
exteroceptors, proprioceptors, or interoceptors.
Exteroceptors are close to the body surface and are specialized to detect sensory information from the external
environment (such as visual, olfactory, gustatory, auditory, and tactile stimuli). Receptors in this class are sensitive to touch (light stimulation of the skin surface),
pressure (stimulation of receptors in the deep layers of the
skin, or deeper parts of the body), temperature, pain, and
vibration. Exteroceptors are further classified as teloreceptors or contact receptors:
• teloreceptors (G. tele, “distant”), include receptors
that respond to distant stimuli (such as light or
sound), and do not require direct physical contact
with the stimulus in order to be stimulated;
• contact receptors, which transmit tactile, pressure,
pain, or thermal stimuli, require direct contact of the
stimulus with the body.
Proprioceptors transmit sensory information from
muscles, tendons, and joints about the position of a body
part, such as a limb in space. There is a static position
sense relating to a stationary position and a kinesthetic
sense (G. kinesis, “movement”), relating to the movement
of a body part. The receptors of the vestibular system
located in the inner ear, relaying sensory information
about the movement and orientation of the head, are also
classified as proprioceptors.
Interoceptors detect sensory information concerning the
status of the body’s internal environment, such as stretch,
blood pressure, pH, oxygen or carbon dioxide concentration, and osmolarity.
Receptors are further classified into the following three
categories according to the modality to which they respond: nociceptors, thermoreceptors, and mechanoreceptors
(Table 10.2).
Nociceptors are rapidly adapting receptors that are sensitive
to noxious or painful stimuli. They are located at the peripheral terminations of lightly myelinated free nerve endings
of type Aδ fibers, or unmyelinated type C fibers, transmitting
pain. Nociceptors are further classified into three types.
1 Mechanosensitive nociceptors (of Aδ fibers), which are
sensitive to intense mechanical stimulation (such as
pinching with pliers) or injury to tissues.
2 Temperature-sensitive (thermosensitive) nociceptors
(of Aδ fibers), which are sensitive to intense heat and cold.
3 Polymodal nociceptors (of C fibers), which are sensitive
to noxious stimuli that are mechanical, thermal, or chemical in nature. Although most nociceptors are sensitive
to one particular type of painful stimulus, some may
respond to two or more types.
Nociception is the reception of noxious sensory information elicited by tissue injury, which is transmitted to the CNS
by nociceptors. Pain is the perception of discomfort or an
agonizing sensation of variable magnitude, evoked by the
stimulation of sensory nerve endings.
Thermoreceptors are sensitive to warmth or cold. These
slowly adapting receptors are further classified into three
types.
1 Cold receptors, which consist of free nerve endings of
lightly myelinated Aδ fibers.
2 Warmth receptors, which consist of the free nerve
endings of unmyelinated C fibers that respond to increases
in temperature.
3 Temperature-sensitive nociceptors that are sensitive to
excessive heat or cold.
Mechanoreceptors, which comprise both exteroceptors and
proprioceptors, are activated following physical deformation
due to touch, pressure, stretch, or vibration of the skin,
muscles, tendons, ligaments, and joint capsules, in which they
reside. A mechanoreceptor may be classified as nonencapsulated or encapsulated depending on whether a structural
device encloses its peripheral nerve ending component.
Free nerve endings (Fig. 10.1) are present in the epidermis,
dermis, cornea, dental pulp, mucous membranes of the oral
and nasal cavities and of the respiratory, gastrointestinal, and
urinary tracts, muscles, tendons, ligaments, joint capsules,
and bones. The peripheral nerve terminals of the free nerve
endings lack Schwann cells and myelin sheaths. They are
stimulated by touch, pressure, thermal, or painful stimuli.
Peritrichial nerve endings (Fig. 10.2) are specialized members of this category. They are large-diameter, myelinated,
Aβ fibers that coil around a hair follicle below its associated
sebaceous gland. This type of receptor is stimulated only
when a hair is being bent.
Tactile receptors (Fig. 10.3) consist of disc-shaped, peripheral nerve endings of large-diameter, myelinated, Aβ fibers.
Each disc-shaped terminal is associated with a specialized
epithelial cell, the Merkel cell, located in the stratum basale
of the epidermis. These receptors, frequently referred to as
Merkel’s discs (Fig. 10.4), are present mostly in glabrous
(hairless), and occasionally in hairy skin. Merkel’s discs
respond to discriminative touch stimuli that facilitate the
distinguishing of texture, shape, and edges of objects.
Encapsulated mechanoreceptors include Meissner’s corpuscles, pacinian corpuscles, and Ruffini’s end organs.
Meissner’s corpuscles (Fig. 10.5) are present in the dermal
papillae of glabrous skin of the lips, forearm, palm, and sole,
as well as in the connective tissue papillae of the tongue.
These corpuscles consist of the peripheral terminals of Aβ
fibers, which are encapsulated by a peanut-shaped structural
device consisting of a stack of concentric Schwann cells
surrounded by a connective tissue capsule. They are rapidly
adapting and are sensitive to two-point tactile (fine) discrimination, and are thus of great importance to the visually
impaired by permitting them to be able to read Braille.
Pacinian corpuscles (Fig. 10.6), the largest of the
mechanoreceptors, are rapidly adapting and resemble an
onion in cross-section. Each Pacinian corpuscle consists
of Aβ-fiber terminals encapsulated by layers of modified
fibroblasts that are enclosed in a connective tissue capsule.
Pacinian corpuscles are located in the dermis, hypodermis,
interosseous membranes, ligaments, external genitalia, joint
capsules, and peritoneum, as well as in the pancreas. They
are more rapidly adapting than Meissner’s corpuscles and
are believed to respond to pressure and vibratory stimuli,
including tickling sensations.
Ruffini’s end organs (corpuscles of Ruffini) (Fig. 10.7)
are located in joint capsules, the dermis, and the underlying
hypodermis of hairy skin. The unmyelinated peripheral
terminals of Aβ myelinated fibers are slowly adapting. They
intertwine around the core of collagen fibers, which is surrounded by a lamellated cellular capsule. Ruffini’s end organs
respond to stretching of the collagen bundles in the skin or
joint capsules and may provide proprioceptive information.
Muscle spindles and Golgi tendon organs (GTOs) are
also encapsulated mechanoreceptors, but, due to their specialized function, they are discussed separately.
The mucle spindles and
GTOs detect sensory input
from the skeletal muscle and
transmit it to the spinal cord
where it plays an important
role in reflex activity and motor control involving the cerebellum. In addition, sensory input from these muscle receptors
is also relayed to the cerebral cortex by way of the DCML
pathway, which mediates information concerning posture,
position sense, as well as movement and orientation of the
body and its parts.
Extrafusal fibers are ordinary skeletal muscle cells constituting the majority of gross muscle, and their stimulation results
in muscle contraction. Muscle spindles, composed of small
bundles of encapsulated intrafusal fibers, are dispersed
throughout gross muscle. These are dynamic stretch receptors
that continuously check for changes in muscle length.
Each muscle spindle is composed of two to 12 intrafusal
fibers enclosed in a slender capsule, which in turn is
surrounded by an outer fusiform connective tissue capsule
whose tapered ends are attached to the connective tissue
sheath surrounding the extrafusal muscle fibers (Fig. 10.8).
The compartment between the inner and outer capsules contains a glycosaminoglycan-rich viscous fluid.
There are two types of intrafusal fibers based on their
morphological characteristics: nuclear bag fibers and nuclear
chain fibers. Both nuclear bag and nuclear chain fibers possess a central, noncontractile region housing multiple nuclei,
and a skeletal muscle (myofibril-containing) contractile portion at each end of the central region. The nuclear bag fibers
are larger, and their multiple nuclei are clustered in the “baglike” dilated central region of the fiber. The nuclear chain
fibers are smaller and consist of multiple nuclei arranged
sequentially, as in a “chain” of pearls, in the central region of
the fiber.
Each intrafusal fiber of a muscle spindle receives sensory innervation via the
peripheral processes of pseudounipolar sensory neurons
Each intrafusal fiber of a muscle spindle receives sensory
innervation via the peripheral processes of pseudounipolar
sensory neurons whose cell bodies are housed in dorsal root
ganglia, or in the sensory ganglia of the cranial nerves (and in
the case of the trigeminal nerve, within its mesencephalic
nucleus). Since the large-diameter Aα fibers spiral around the
noncontractile region of the intrafusal fibers, they are known
as annulospiral or primary endings. These endings become
activated at the beginning of muscle stretch or tension. In
addition to the annulospiral endings, the intrafusal fibers,
mainly the nuclear chain fibers, also receive smaller diameter,
Aβ peripheral processes of pseudounipolar neurons. These
nerve fibers terminate on both sides of the annulospiral ending, are referred to as secondary or flower spray endings,
and are activated during the time that the stretch is in
progress (Fig. 10.8).
In addition to the sensory innervation, intrafusal fibers
also receive motor innervation via gamma motoneurons
(fusimotor neurons) that innervate the contractile portions of
the intrafusal fibers, causing them to undergo contraction.
Since the intrafusal fibers are oriented parallel to the longitudinal axis of the extrafusal fibers, when a muscle is stretched,
the central, noncontractile region of the intrafusal fibers is
also stretched, distorting and stimulating the sensory nerve
endings coiled around them, causing the nerve endings to
fire. However, when the muscle contracts, tension on the
central noncontractile region of the intrafusal fibers decreases
(which reduces the rate of firing of the sensory nerve endings
coiled around it).
During voluntary muscle activity simultaneous stimulation of the extrafusal fibers by the alpha motoneurons, and
the contractile portions of the intrafusal fibers by the gamma
motoneurons, serves to modulate the sensitivity of the
intrafusal fibers. That is, the gamma motoneurons cause
corresponding contraction of the contractile portions of the
intrafusal fibers, which stretch the central noncontractile
region of the intrafusal fibers. Thus, the sensitivity of the
intrafusal fibers is constantly maintained by continuously
readapting to the most current status of muscle length. In this
fashion the muscle spindles can detect a change in muscle
length (resulting from stretch or contraction) irrespective of
muscle length at the onset of muscle activity. It should be
noted that even though they contract, the intrafusal fibers,
due to their small number and size, do not contribute to
any significant extent to the overall contraction of a gross
muscle.
The simple stretch reflex, whose mechanism is based on the
role of the intrafusal fibers, functions to maintain muscle
length caused by external disturbances. As a muscle is
stretched, the intrafusal fibers of the muscle spindles are
also stretched. This in turn stimulates the sensory afferent
annulospiral and flower spray endings to transmit this
information to those alpha motoneurons of the CNS (spinal
cord, or cranial nerve motor nuclei) that innervate the agonist
(stretched) muscle as well as to those motoneurons that
innervate the antagonist muscle(s). The degree of stretching
is proportional to (or related to) the load placed on the
muscle. The larger the load, the more strongly the spindles
are depolarized and the more extrafusal muscle fibers are in
turn activated. As these alpha motoneurons of the stretched
muscle fire, they stimulate the contraction of the required
number of extrafusal muscle fibers of the agonist muscle.
The alpha motoneurons of the antagonist muscle(s) are
inhibited so the antagonist muscle relaxes. The simple reflex
arc involves the firing of only two neurons—an afferent
sensory neuron and an efferent motoneuron—providing
dynamic information concerning the changes of the load
on the muscle and position of the body region in threedimensional space.
Unlike muscle spindles, which are oriented parallel to the
longitudinal axis of the extrafusal muscle fibers, GTOs are
in series. Furthermore, GTOs do not receive motor innervation as the muscle spindles do. GTOs consist of interlacing
intrafusal collagen bundles enclosed in a connective tissue
capsule (Fig. 10.9). A large-diameter, type Aα sensory fiber,
whose cell body is housed in a dorsal root sensory ganglion
or a cranial nerve sensory ganglion, passes through the
capsule and then branches into numerous delicate terminals
that are interposed among the intrafusal collagen bundles.
The central processes of these Aα afferent neurons enter
the spinal cord via the dorsal roots of the spinal nerves to
terminate and establish synaptic contacts with inhibitory
interneurons that, in turn, synapse with alpha motoneurons
supplying the contracted agonist muscle.
During muscle contraction, as the muscle shortens, tension
is produced in the tendons anchoring that muscle to bone,
compressing the nerve fiber terminals interposed among the
inelastic intrafusal collagen fibers. This compression activates the sensory terminals in the GTOs, which transmit this
sensory information to the CNS, providing proprioceptive
information concerning muscle activity and preventing the
placement of excessive forces on the muscle and tendon. In
contrast, the noncontractile portions of the muscle spindles
are not stretched, and are consequently undisturbed. The
contractile regions of the muscle spindles, however, undergo
corresponding contraction that enables them to detect a
future change in muscle length (resulting from stretch or
contraction).
During slight stretching of a relaxed muscle, the muscle
spindles are stimulated whereas the GTOs remain undisturbed and quiescent. During further stretching of the
muscle, which produces tension on the tendons, both
the muscle spindles and the GTOs are stimulated. Thus
GTOs monitor and check the amount of tension exerted on
the muscle (regardless of whether it is tension generated by
muscle stretch or contraction), whereas muscle spindles
check muscle fiber length and rate of change of muscle length
(during muscle stretch or contraction).
The anterolateral system
(ALS) transmits nociceptive,
thermal, and nondiscriminatory (crude) touch information to higher brain centers
(see Table 10.2), generally by
a sequence of three neurons and interneurons (Fig. 10.10).
The neuron sequence consists of:
1 A first order neuron (pseudounipolar neuron) whose cell
body is located in a dorsal root ganglion. It transmits sensory information from peripheral structures to the dorsal
(posterior) horn of the spinal cord.
2 A second order neuron whose cell body is located within
the dorsal horn of the spinal cord, and whose axon usually decussates and ascends:
• in the direct pathway of the ALS (spinothalamic
tract) to synapse in the contralateral thalamus, and
sending some collaterals to the reticular formation;
• in the indirect pathway of the ALS (spinoreticular
tract) to synapse in the reticular formation, and sending some collaterals to the thalamus; or
• as spinomesencephalic, spinotectal, or spinohypothalamic fibers to synapse in several brainstem nuclei.
3 A third order neuron whose cell body is located in the
thalamus, and whose axon ascends ipsilaterally to terminate in the somatosensory cortex.
In some cases, the first order neuron may synapse with an
interneuron that resides entirely within the dorsal horn, and
whose axon synapses with the second order neuron.
Receptors that transmit nociceptive information consist
of high-threshold free nerve endings ramifying near the
external surface and internal environment of the organism.
These are dendritic arborizations of small, pseudounipolar,
first order neurons (Fig. 10.11) whose somata are housed in
a dorsal root ganglion. The peripheral processes of these
pseudounipolar neurons consist of two main types of fiber
(Fig. 10.12):
1 Thinly myelinated Aδ (fast-conducting) fibers, which
relay sharp, short-term, well-localized pain (such as that
resulting from a pinprick). These fibers transmit sensations that do not elicit an affective component associated
with the experience.
2 Unmyelinated C (slow-conducting) fibers, which relay
dull, persistent, poorly localized pain (such as that resulting from excessive stretching of a tendon). These fibers
transmit sensations that elicit an affective response.
The central processes of these pseudounipolar neurons
enter the spinal cord at the dorsal root entry zone, via the lateral division of the dorsal roots of the spinal nerves, and upon
entry collectively form the dorsolateral fasciculus (tract of
Lissauer), which is present at all spinal cord levels. These
central processes bifurcate into short ascending and descending branches. These branches either ascend or descend one to
three spinal cord levels within this tract, to terminate in their
target laminae of the dorsal horn, where they synapse with
second order neurons (or with interneurons). Therefore,
although stimulation of the peripheral endings of fibers carried by one spinal nerve may enter the spinal cord at a specific
spinal level, collaterals of the ascending and descending
branches spread the signal to neighboring spinal levels above
and below the level of entry. These collaterals play an important function in intersegmental reflexes.
The cell bodies of the second order neurons transmitting
nociception reside in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord
(Fig. 10.12). Recent findings indicate that the axons of these
second order neurons course in either the direct (spinothalamic) or indirect (spinoreticular) pathways of the ALS, or as
three sets of fibers (the remaining components of the ALS):
the spinomesencephalic, spinotectal, or spinohypothalamic
fibers. Approximately 15% of nociceptive fibers project directly to the thalamus whereas 85% project to the thalamus via
a relay in the reticular formation.
Type Aδ fibers of first order neurons synapse primarily with
second order neurons in lamina I (posteromarginal nucleus,
or zone) and lamina V (reticular nucleus) of the spinal cord
gray matter. However, many first order neurons synapse
with spinal cord interneurons that are associated with reflex
motor activity. The axons of the second order neurons flow
across the midline to the contralateral side of the spinal cord
in the anterior white commissure, forming the spinothalamic
tract (Fig. 10.13).
The spinothalamic tract transmits not only nociceptive
input, but also thermal and nondiscriminative (crude) touch
input to the contralateral ventral posterior lateral nucleus of
the thalamus. It also sends some projections to the ventral
posterior inferior, and the intralaminar nuclei of the thalamus. Although the spinothalamic tract ends at the thalamus,
as it ascends through the brainstem it also sends collaterals to
the reticular formation. Since the spinothalamic tract (direct
pathway of the ALS: spinal cord → thalamus) is phylogenetically a newer pathway, it is referred to as the neospinothalamic pathway.
Only about 15% of the nociceptive fibers from the spinal
cord, ascending in the ALS and carrying nociceptive information, terminate directly in the thalamus via the spinothalamic
tract. Although referred to as the “spinothalamic tract,” it actually consists of two anatomically distinct tracts: the lateral
spinothalamic tract (located in the lateral funiculus) and the
very small anterior spinothalamic tract (located in the anterior funiculus). Earlier studies indicated that the lateral
spinothalamic tract transmitted only nociceptive and thermal
input, whereas the anterior spinothalamic tract transmitted
only nondiscriminative (crude) touch. Recent studies however, support the finding that both the anterior and lateral
spinothalamic tracts (as well as the other component fibers of
the ALS: spinoreticular, spinomesencephalic, spinotectal, and
spinohypothalamic), transmit nociceptive, thermal, and nondiscriminative (crude) tactile signals to higher brain centers.
Type C fibers of first order neurons terminate on interneurons in laminae II (substantia gelatinosa) and III of the dorsal
horn. Axons of these interneurons synapse with second
order neurons in laminae V–VIII. Many of the axons of these
second order neurons ascend ipsilaterally, however a small
number of axons sweep to the opposite side of the spinal cord
in the anterior white commissure. These axons form the more
prominent ipsilateral and smaller contralateral spinoreticular tracts. The spinoreticular tracts transmit nociceptive,
thermal, and nondiscriminatory (crude) touch signals from
the spinal cord to the thalamus indirectly, by forming multiple synapses in the reticular formation prior to their thalamic
projections. Since the spinoreticular tract (indirect pathway
of the ALS: spinal cord → reticular formation → thalamus) is
phylogenetically an older pathway, it is referred to as the
paleospinothalamic pathway (Fig. 10.14).
The spinoreticular tract is a bilateral (primarily uncrossed)
tract that conveys sensory information to the brainstem
reticular formation, the region responsible for producing
arousal and wakefulness, thus alerting the organism following an injury. Impulses from the reticular formation are then
relayed bilaterally to the intralaminar nuclei of the thalamus, via reticulothalamic fibers. Since these nuclei lack
somatotopic organization, there is only an indistinct localization of sensory signals carried by this pathway. The reticular
formation and its continuation into the diencephalon, the
intralaminar nuclei of the thalamus, are components of the
reticular-activating system (RAS). The RAS functions in
activating the organism’s entire nervous system, so as to
elicit responses that will enable it to evade painful stimuli.
In addition, there are some second order neurons from the
dorsal horn that bypass the reticular formation and relay sensory input from C fibers directly to the intralaminar nuclei of
the thalamus.
The spinomesencephalic fibers terminate in the periaqueductal gray matter and the midbrain raphe nuclei, both of
which are believed to give rise to fibers that modulate nociceptive transmission and are thus collectively referred to
as the “descending pain-inhibiting system” (see discussion
later). Furthermore, some spinomesencephalic fibers terminate in the parabrachial nucleus, which sends fibers to the
amygdala—a component of the limbic system associated
with the processing of emotions. Via their connections to the
limbic system, the spinomesencephalic fibers play a role in
the emotional component of pain.
The spinotectal fibers terminate mainly in the deep layers
of the superior colliculus. The superior colliculi have the
reflex function of turning the upper body, head, and eyes in
the direction of a painful stimulus (Fig. 10.14).
The spinohypothalamic fibers ascend to the hypothalamus where they synapse with neurons that give rise
to the hypothalamospinal tract. This pathway is associated
with the autonomic and reflex responses (i.e., endocrine and
cardiovascular) to nociception (Fig. 10.14).
Approximately 85% of the nociceptive fibers from the
spinal cord ascending in the ALS, terminate in the brainstem
reticular formation. From there, the information eventually
reaches the thalamus via multiple additional synapses that
occur in the brainstem. The reticular formation sends fibers
transmitting nociceptive input not only to the thalamus
but also to the hypothalamus, which is associated with the
autonomic and reflex responses to nociception, and the
limbic system, which mediates the emotional component of
nociception.
The ventral posterior lateral nucleus gives rise to fibers
that course in the posterior limb of the internal capsule and
in the corona radiata to terminate in the postcentral gyrus
(primary somatosensory cortex, S-I) of the parietal lobe of
the cerebral cortex. Additionally, the ventral posterior lateral
nucleus also sends some direct projections to the secondary
somatosensory cortex, S-II (Fig. 10.15).
The ventral posterior inferior nucleus projects mostly to
the secondary somatosensory cortex (S-II), although some
of its fibers terminate in the primary somatosensory cortex
(S-I).
The intralaminar nuclei send fibers to the striatum (the
caudate nucleus and the putamen), the S-I and S-II, as well
as to the cingulate gyrus and the prefrontal cortex.
It should be noted that most of the nociception-relaying
fibers arriving at the intralaminar nuclei transmit nociceptive information relayed there from the reticular formation.
Multiple synapses have been formed in the reticular formation prior to synapsing in the intralaminar nuclei, and thus,
strictly speaking, the intralaminar relay neurons for this
pathway are not the third order neurons in the sequence, but
they function as if they were third order neurons.
The primary somatosensory cortex (S-I) consists of the
postcentral gyrus of the parietal lobe, which corresponds to
Brodmann’s areas 3a, 3b, 1, 2 (Fig. 10.15A). The secondary
somatosensory cortex (S-II) consists of Brodmann’s area
43, located on the superior bank of the lateral fissure, at the
inferior extent of the primary motor and sensory areas.
Axons of the thalamic third order neurons terminate
in somatotopically corresponding regions of the primary
somatosensory cortex. Regions of the head are represented in
the inferior half of the postcentral gyrus near the lateral
fissure, whereas those of the upper limb and the trunk are
represented in its superior half. The lower limb is represented
in the medial surface of the postcentral gyrus, and the perineum in the paracentral lobule. The body areas with the
largest cortical area representation are the head and upper
limb, reflecting the great discriminative capability that structures in these regions possess (Fig. 10.16).
In summary, nociceptive signals relayed from the spinal
cord directly to the ventral posterior lateral, the ventral posterior inferior, and the intralaminar nuclei of the thalamus via
the spinothalamic tract (neospinothalamic, direct pathway of
the ALS) are transmitted to the somatosensory cortex (both
to S-I and S-II). The postcentral gyrus is the site where processing of pain localization, intensity, quality, and sensory
integration takes place at the conscious level. The primary
somatosensory cortex sends projections to the secondary
somatosensory cortex, which is believed to have an important function in the memory of sensory input.
In contrast, nociceptive signals relayed from the spinal
cord to the reticular formation via the spinoreticular tracts
(paleospinothalamic, indirect pathway of the ALS) are then
transmitted to:
• the intralaminar nuclei of the thalamus (the cranial
extension of the reticular formation into the thalamus),
which in turn project to the primary somesthetic cortex;
• the hypothalamus; and
• the limbic system.
The projections through the reticular formation function
in the arousal of the organism in response to nociceptive
input, whereas the projections to the hypothalamus and
limbic system have an important function in the autonomic,
reflex, and emotional (suffering) responses to a painful
experience.
Cerebral imaging studies such as electroencephalography
(EEG), functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI),
magnetoencephalography (MEG), and positron emission
tomography (PET) have demonstrated that nociceptive
signals are not only processed at the primary and secondary
omatosensory cortices, but also in the anterior cingulate
cortex, anterior insular cortex, and even the supplemental
motor area of the motor cortex. The anterior cingulate and
anterior insular cortices are connected with the limbic cortex,
which plays a role in the emotional aspect of pain.
A striking characteristic of
the brain is that although
it receives and processes
nociceptive information, the
brain itself has no sensation
of pain. During brain surgery, the patient is often awake
and has no pain sensation from the brain tissue itself. The
structures that have to be anesthetized during brain surgery
are the dura mater, the bones of the skull, and the extracranial soft tissues. Moreover, although the internal (visceral)
organs themselves have no pain receptors, pain receptors are
present embedded in the walls of the arteries serving these
organs.
Visceral pain is characterized as diffuse and poorly localized, and is often “referred to” and felt in another somatic
structure distant or near the source of visceral pain.
Nociceptive signals from the viscera generally follow the
same pathway as signals arising from somatic structures.
General visceral afferent nociceptive information from visceral structures of the trunk is carried mostly by type C, Aδ,
or Aβ fibers (Fig. 10.17). The peripheral terminals of these
fibers are associated with Pacinian corpuscles that respond to
excessive stretching of the intestinal wall, a lesion in the wall
of the gastrointestinal tract, or to smooth muscle spasm. The
cell bodies of these sensory (pseudounipolar), first order
neurons are housed in the dorsal root ganglia, and their
central processes carry the information, via the dorsolateral
fasciculus (tract of Lissauer), to the dorsal horn and lateral
gray matter of the spinal cord. Here, these central processes
synapse with second order neurons as well as with neurons
associated with reflex activities.
The axons of the second order neurons join the anterolateral system to relay nociceptive signals from visceral structures to the reticular formation and the thalamus. Fibers
from the reticular formation project to the intralaminar
nuclei of the thalamus, which in turn project to the cerebral
cortex and the hypothalamus. Recall that the intralaminar
nuclei of the thalamus lack somatotopic organization, resulting in only an indistinct localization of sensory signals
carried by this pathway.
Visceral pain signals relayed to the primary somatosensory cortex may be associated with referred pain to a somatic
structure. In addition to projections to the somatosensory
cortex, recent studies indicate that nociceptive signals are
also relayed to the anterior cingulate and anterior insular
cortices, two cortical areas implicated in the processing of
visceral pain.
Temperature sensory input
is transmitted to the CNS via
unmyelinated C fibers that
are activated by warm stimuli, or by lightly myelinated
Aδ fibers that are activated
by cold stimuli (see Fig.
10.12; Table 10.2).
All fibers enter the spinal cord at the dorsal root entry
zone in the lateral division of the dorsal root of the spinal
nerves. These fibers accompany nociceptive fibers and, upon
entering the spinal cord, join the dorsolateral fasciculus
(tract of Lissauer). In the dorsolateral fasciculus, they bifurcate into short ascending and descending fibers. These fibers
ascend or descend respectively, one to three spinal cord
levels to synapse in laminae I, II, and III of the dorsal horn
gray matter. Temperature input is relayed to interneurons
which, in turn, transmit the information to second order
neurons in lamina V.
The axons of the second order neurons, accompanied by
nociceptive fibers, decussate in the anterior white commissure to join the contralateral anterolateral system. Some of
these fibers ascend to terminate in the brainstem reticular
formation; however, most terminate primarily in the ventral
posterior lateral nucleus of the thalamus. Third order
neuron fibers from the thalamus relay thermal sensory
information to the somesthetic cortex.
Tactile sensation is divisible into nondiscriminative
(crude) touch and discriminative (fine) touch. Crude
touch, transmitted via the ALS (discussed above), is sensed
following gentle stroking of the skin with a fine cotton strand,
but this sensation does not include detailed information
about the stimulus. Tactile examination of an object is dependent on discriminative (fine) touch sense, which enables
one to detect fine detail regarding the location, size, shape,
and texture of an object even when the eyes are closed.
Conscious proprioception may be categorized into static
and dynamic proprioception. Static proprioception (static
position sense) is the awareness of the position of a body part
such as a limb, whereas dynamic proprioception (kinesthetic sense) is the awareness of movement of a body part,
and balance.
Discriminative (fine) touch, pressure, vibratory sense, as
well as proprioceptive sensory information are transmitted
to higher brain centers, reaching consciousness, by three
neurons arranged in sequence (Fig. 10.18; Table 10.3).
1 A first order neuron (pseudounipolar neuron) whose cell
body is located in a dorsal root ganglion. The neuron
transmits sensory information from the periphery to the
spinal cord (for reflex activity) and to the dorsal column
nuclei (the nucleus gracilis and the nucleus cuneatus).
2 A second order neuron whose cell body is located in the
dorsal column nuclei in the medulla, and whose axon
decussates and ascends to terminate in the contralateral
thalamus.
3 A third order neuron whose cell body resides in the
thalamus, and whose axon ascends ipsilaterally to terminate in the somatosensory cortex. The specifics of these
pathways are discussed below.
The receptors that transmit discriminative (fine) touch,
pressure, and conscious proprioception information consist of:
• free nerve endings responding to touch, pressure, and
proprioception in the skin, muscles, and joint capsules;
• tactile (Merkel’s) discs responding to touch and pressure
in the skin;
• peritrichial endings stimulated by touch of the hair follicles;
• Meissner’s corpuscles activated by touch of the skin; and
• Pacinian corpuscles stimulated by touch, pressure, vibration, and proprioception in the deep layers of the skin,
and in visceral structures.
These first order pseudounipolar neurons, whose cell
bodies are located in the dorsal root ganglia, send peripheral
processes to somatic or visceral structures. These peripheral
processes are medium-size type Aβ and large-size type Aα
fibers. Upon being stimulated, the peripheral processes
transmit the sensory information to the spinal cord by way of
the central processes of the pseudounipolar neurons, which
enter the spinal cord at the dorsal root entry zone via the
medial division of the dorsal roots of the spinal nerves.
Upon entry into the posterior funiculus of the spinal cord,
the afferent fibers bifurcate into long ascending and short
descending fibers.
The long ascending and short descending fibers give rise
to collateral branches that may synapse with several distinct
cell groups of the dorsal horn interneurons and with ventral
horn motoneurons. These fibers collectively form the dorsal
column pathways, either the fasciculus gracilis or the fasciculus cuneatus, depending on the level of the spinal cord in
which they enter.
The central processes that enter the spinal cord below level T6
include the lower thoracic, lumbar, and sacral levels. They
bring information from the lower limb and lower half of the
trunk. The central processes enter the ipsilateral fasciculus
gracilis (L. gracilis, “slender”) and ascend to the medulla to
terminate in the ipsilateral nucleus gracilis. It should be
recalled that the fasciculus gracilis is present in the entire
length of the spinal cord.
The central processes that enter the spinal cord at level T6 and
above bring information from the upper thoracic and cervical
levels, that is from the upper half of the trunk and upper limb.
These central processes enter the ipsilateral fasciculus cuneatus (L. cuneus, “wedge”) and ascend to the medulla to
synapse with second order neurons in the ipsilateral nucleus
cuneatus. It should be noted that the fasciculus cuneatus is
present only at the upper six thoracic and at all cervical spinal
cord levels.
As the descending fibers of all of the first order neurons
descend to various spinal cord levels within the fasciculus
gracilis or the fasciculus cuneatus, they give rise to collateral
branches along the way. These collateral branches form
synapses with interneurons and alpha motoneurons, thus
participating in intersegmental reflexes.
The first order fibers terminating in the nucleus gracilis and
nucleus cuneatus synapse with second order neurons whose
cell bodies are housed in these nuclei. The fibers of the second
order neurons form the internal arcuate fibers as they curve
ventromedially through the reticular formation to the opposite side. These fibers ascend as the medial lemniscus (L.
lemniscus, “ribbon”) in the caudal part of the medulla, cranial
to the prominent pyramidal (motor) decussation, to synapse
with third order neurons in the ventral posterior lateral
nucleus of the thalamus.
The ventral posterior lateral nucleus of the thalamus houses
the cell bodies of the third order neurons of the DCML
pathway. The fibers arising from the thalamus ascend in the
posterior limb of the internal capsule and the corona radiata
to terminate in the primary somatosensory cortex of the
postcentral gyrus (which occupies Brodmann’s areas 3a, 3b,
1, and 2, of the parietal cortex).
Brodmann’s area 3b receives most of the projections arising
from the ventral posterior lateral nucleus of the thalamus,
and is the site where the initial cortical processing of tactile
discrimination input takes place. Brodmann’s area 3b in turn
projects to Brodmann’s areas 1 and 2. Area 1 is responsible
for determining the texture and area 2 the size and shape of
objects. In contrast, area 3a is stimulated by signals arising
from muscle spindles and is believed to participate in motor
functions.
The primary somatosensory cortex projects to the secondary somatosensory cortex, located on the superior border
of the lateral fissure. Some third order neuron fibers from the
thalamus terminate directly in the secondary somatosensory
cortex.
Only a small portion of the
proprioceptive information
enters consciousness. Most
of the proprioceptive information does not reach conscious levels, and instead is transmitted directly to the
cerebellum via the ascending somatosensory cerebellar
pathways without projecting to the thalamus or the cerebral
cortex. These pathways, which process subconscious proprioception from muscles, tendons, and joints, are two-neuron
pathways, consisting of first order and second order neurons. The pathways include (Fig. 10.19; Tables 10.1, 10.4): the
dorsal (posterior) spinocerebellar tract, the cuneocerebellar
tract, the ventral (anterior) spinocerebellar tract, and the
rostral spinocerebellar tract.
The primary function of the
dorsal (posterior) spinocerebellar tract (Fig. 10.19A;
Table 10.5) is to relay proprioceptive input from the
neuromuscular spindles and
GTOs of the ipsilateral trunk
and lower limb, to the cerebellum. It should be recalled, however, that it also relays some touch and pressure sensation
from the skin of the ipsilateral trunk and lower limb.
First order neurons (pseudounipolar neurons) whose cell
bodies are housed in the dorsal root ganglia send their
peripheral processes to the skin, muscles, tendons, and joints.
Here they perceive proprioceptive information, which is then
transmitted to the spinal cord by their central processes.
These central processes join the medial division of the dorsal
roots of the spinal nerves to synapse in the nucleus dorsalis
(Clark’s column, lamina VII of spinal cord levels C8 to L2,3)
at their level of entry. Sensory information transmitted by
spinal nerves entering at the sacral and lower lumbar spinal
cord levels (below Clark’s column) is relayed to the caudal
extent of the nucleus dorsalis (L2,3) by ascending in the fasciculus gracilis.
Clark’s column houses the cell bodies of second order
neurons whose axons form the dorsal spinocerebellar tract,
which ascends ipsilaterally in the lateral funiculus of the
spinal cord. When this tract reaches the brainstem it joins the
restiform body (of the inferior cerebellar peduncle), and then
passes (as “mossy fibers”) into the vermis of the cerebellum.
The dorsal spinocerebellar tract relays proprioceptive information directly to the cerebellum where this information is
processed; it plays an important role in the coordination of
movements of individual lower limb muscles and in the
maintenance of posture.
Proprioceptive sensory information from the neck,
upper limb, and upper half
of the trunk enters at spinal
cord segments C2 to T5. The
central processes of the pseudounipolar first order neurons
ascend in the fasciculus cuneatus and terminate in the external (accessory) cuneate nucleus—the nucleus dorsalis of
Clark homologue at cervical levels above C8 (Fig. 10.19A;
Table 10.5).
The axons of the second order neurons, whose cell bodies
are housed in the accessory cuneate nucleus, form the cuneocerebellar tract. This tract is referred to as the neck and upper
limb counterpart of the dorsal spinocerebellar tract. Fibers
of the cuneocerebellar tract join the restiform body (of the
inferior cerebellar peduncle) and then enter the anterior lobe
of the cerebellum ipsilaterally. Information carried by the
cuneocerebellar tract plays a role in movements of the head
and upper limbs.
The ventral (anterior)
spinocerebellar tract relays
proprioceptive information
from the muscle spindles
and GTOs of the trunk and
lower limb. It functions in the coordination of movement of
the lower limb, and maintenance of posture (Fig. 10.19B;
Table 10.5).
First order neurons (pseudounipolar neurons) transmit
sensory input to laminae V–VII of the lumbar, sacral, and
coccygeal spinal cord levels, where they terminate and synapse with second order neurons.
The axons of these second order neurons, known as spinal
border cells, form the ventral (anterior) spinocerebellar
tract, which decussates in the anterior white commissure and
ascends in the lateral funiculus of the spinal cord to the
medulla. At pontine levels these fibers join the superior
cerebellar peduncle to pass as “mossy fibers” into the vermis
of the cerebellum. These fibers then decussate again to their
actual side of origin within the cerebellum.
Proprioceptive information
from the head and upper
limb is transmitted to C4–C8
spinal cord levels. The central processes of first order neurons synapse with second
order neurons whose cell bodies reside in lamina VII of the
dorsal horn. The fibers of the second order neurons form the
primarily uncrossed rostral spinocerebellar tract, the head
and upper limb counterpart of the ventral spinocerebellar
tract. These fibers join the restiform body (of the inferior cerebellar peduncle) to enter the cerebellum. Additionally, some
fibers pass into the cerebellum via the superior cerebellar
peduncle (Fig. 10.19B; Table 10.5). This tract plays a role in
movement of the head and upper limb.
The extent of damage that may occur to a peripheral nerve, and the sensory
symptoms that will arise following a lesion, differ depending on whether the
damaged nerve carries sensory fibers and which fibers are involved in the
lesion. Diminished cutaneous sensation due to damage of the sensory fibers of
a particular nerve is usually narrower than the range of distribution of the
nerve, due to the overlapping areas of distribution of adjacent nerves.
The sensory deficits that arise following a lesion to a dorsal root or to a spinal
nerve are usually revealed in a segmental distribution (Fig. 10.20). Since
peripheral nerves branch and extend their innervation into territories of adjacent nerves, a peripheral nerve lesion may include areas supplied by several
adjacent spinal cord levels. Due to this innervation overlap, it is difficult
to trace the sensory deficit to a single spinal nerve or dorsal root. Dorsal root
irritation results in pain and paresthesia (G., “abnormal sensations”), such
as tingling, itching, or pricking of the skin.
In order to be able to identify the site of a spinal cord lesion, one has to be
familiar with the anatomical arrangement of the various ascending and
descending tracts in the spinal cord. In general, the pathways relaying pain,
temperature, and nondiscriminative (crude) touch from the body, ascend
in the opposite side of origin, in the anterolateral aspect of the spinal cord.
Pathways relaying discriminative (fine) touch and proprioceptive modalities ascend ipsilateral to the side of origin, in the dorsal white columns.
Although spinal cord injuries are rarely limited to a particular tract, quadrant, or side of the spinal cord, the hemisection of the spinal cord is used for
instructive purposes. One such example is the Brown-Séquard syndrome
(Fig. 10.21).
When the spinal cord is hemisected (only the right or left half is severed),
all of the tracts (both ascending and descending) coursing through the level of
the lesion are severed, and the following will be observed.
1 The lower motoneurons ipsilateral to and at the level of the lesion will be
damaged, leading to ipsilateral lower motoneuron paralysis at the
level of the lesion.
2 Since the corticospinal tract (upper motoneurons) will be severed, the individual will exhibit an ipsilateral loss of motor function below the level
of the lesion, followed by spastic paralysis (see Chapter 11).
For sensory deficits at or below the level of the lesion, the following will
be observed.
1 Since the anterolateral system (which includes the spinothalamic,
spinoreticular, spinomesencephalic, spinotectal, and spinohypothalamic
fibers) has been severed, there will be a contralateral loss of:
• pain and temperature sensation beginning one or two segments
below the level of the lesion; and
• nondiscriminative (crude) touch sensation beginning three to four
segments below the level of the lesion.
2 Since the dorsal column pathways (fasciculus gracilis and fasciculus
cuneatus) have been severed, there will be an ipsilateral loss of the following, below the level of the lesion:
• discriminative (fine) touch;
• vibratory sensation;
• proprioceptive ( joint position) sensation: an individual with this
type of lesion will have coordination difficulties (dorsal column sensory ataxia); if the lesion involves the sensory innervation of the lower
limbs the individual will have difficulty in maintaining his balance
when his feet are closely approximated and when his eyes are closed
(positive Romberg sign);
• astereognosis (stereoanesthesia) (G. astereognosis, “inability to
know solids”): an individual with astereognosis is unable to identify
the shape and form of a known object (such as a fork) following
manual examination with the eyes closed, but can identify the object
by sight; and
• two-point discrimination: the individual is unable to perceive simultaneous stimulation by a blunt instrument at two separate points on
the skin as two distinct points of stimulation.
Since crude touch is carried by more than one ascending sensory pathway,
ascending on both sides of the spinal cord, some touch sensation remains
intact in individuals with Brown-Séquard syndrome. Furthermore, if only the
dorsal right quadrant of the spinal cord is damaged, pain and temperature
sensation will not be affected, whereas there will be a loss of discriminative
(fine) touch and proprioceptive sensation, below the level of the lesion on the
ipsilateral (right) side of the body.
Tabes dorsalis, a form of tertiary neurosyphilis, is a rare condition which is
manifested during the second decade after an individual becomes infected
with the microorganism causing syphilis. This condition is characterized
by sensory ataxia (G. ataxia, “without order”) resulting from impairment of
two-point discrimination, vibratory sense, position sense, and kinesthesis.
Individuals with this condition find it necessary to look at their lower limbs during walking. Additionally, they have difficulty standing up straight if their feet
are closely approximated when their eyes are closed, or if they are standing in
the dark (referred to as Romberg’s sign). There is also degeneration of the
large-diameter, heavily myelinated fibers coursing in the medial division of
the dorsal root; thus sensory information from the mechanoreceptors to the
ascending sensory pathways is also affected (Fig. 10.22). Additionally, these
individuals experience abnormal pain sensations.
Friedreich’s ataxia is a hereditary disorder that is manifested prior to, or
during, puberty. In this condition, the spinocerebellar tracts as well as
the dorsal column pathways degenerate and, consequently, produce an
increasingly deteriorating ataxia.
In subacute combined degeneration, as a result of vitamin B12 deficiency,
both the corticospinal tracts and the dorsal column pathways undergo degeneration. The deficits in the affected individual are characterized by muscle
weakness as a result of the degeneration of the corticospinal (motor) tracts,
and loss of vibratory sense, two-point discrimination, and proprioception as a
result of the degeneration of the dorsal column pathways.
Syringomyelia (G. syrinx, “tube”) is a disease in which the central canal of
the spinal cord, usually at the lower cervical or upper thoracic spinal cord
levels, becomes enlarged (although the enlargement of the central canal may
extend cranially and/or caudally) (Fig. 10.23). The enlarging canal stretches
and damages the surrounding nerve tissue. The tissue affected first is the
anterior white commissure containing crossing fibers, followed by the damage
to the anterior horn. This results in:
1 Loss of pain and temperature sensation from the skin of both shoulders
and upper extremities due to the destruction of the second order neuron
decussating fibers that relay pain and temperature input. If the lesion
involves only the cervical levels of the spinal cord, the anterior surface of
the arm and forearm is not affected since it is innervated by T1 and T2.
2 Weakness and atrophy of the intrinsic muscles of the hands due to the
degeneration of the motoneurons in the anterior horn of the spinal cord. If
the disease progresses to include additional spinal cord levels and more
nerve tissue surrounding the increasingly enlarged space, additional
deficits will become apparent.
Occlusion of the anterior spinal artery, either by a thrombus or by compression,
will obstruct blood flow to the ventral two-thirds of the spinal cord, and will
result in infarction (Fig. 10.24). If the anterior spinal artery is occluded or compressed near the artery’s origin in the medulla, structures located in the anterior aspect of the medulla, such as the pyramid and medial lemnisci, will be
affected. Damage of the corticospinal fibers in the pyramid above its decussation will result in contralateral hemiparesis. Damage of the medial lemniscus
will result in loss of proprioception and vibratory sense from the opposite side of
the body.
If occlusion or compression of the anterior spinal artery occurs at spinal
levels, it will result in damage of the corticospinal tract fibers and the anterior
horns of the spinal cord. This is characterized by motor function deficits ipsilateral to, and below, the level of the lesion. Since the dorsal column pathways
are not affected by occlusion of the anterior spinal artery at spinal levels, discriminatory (fine) touch and position sense remain intact.
The two posterior spinal arteries supply the dorsal one-third of the spinal cord
(Fig. 10.24). If one or both of the posterior spinal arteries is/are occluded or
compressed, it results in infarction of the dorsal white columns and the ALS. If
only one of the posterior spinal arteries is occluded, or compressed, it will
result in loss of discriminatory (fine) touch and proprioceptive sensation, ipsilaterally, and loss of pain and temperature sensation, contralaterally, below
the level of the lesion. If infarction occurs at caudal medullary levels, near the
level of the vessels’ origin, the dorsal white columns and their respective nuclei
will be damaged. Since the spinothalamic tract is located in the anterolateral
aspect of the caudal medulla, it is not affected.
Lesions involving the spinothalamic tract and its nucleus of termination, the
ventral posterior lateral nucleus of the thalamus, may initially cause diminished or complete loss of touch, pressure, pain, or temperature sensation,
or proprioception from the contralateral side of the body. Spontaneous, inexplicable, agonizing pain and other unusual sensations in the anesthetic parts
may follow. This condition is known as central pain (thalamic pain, thalamic
syndrome).
Isolated lesions in the postcentral gyrus are uncommon. However, since the
postcentral gyrus is supplied by branches of the middle cerebral artery, a vessel
which often becomes occluded, this region of the brain may become infarcted.
A lesion to the primary somatosensory cortex will result in contralateral
loss of:
1 Two-point discrimination.
2 Graphesthesia, the ability to recognize letters or numbers as they are
stroked on the skin.
3 Stereognosis, the ability to identify a known object following tactile
examination without looking.
4 Vibratory sense.
5 Position sense.
Furthermore, although the individual has a minimal impairment of pain,
temperature, and touch sensation, he is unable to localize the stimulus.
Since pain perception is not only processed in the somatosensory cortex, but
also in the anterior cingulate and anterior insular cortices, pain sensation
persists following a lesion to the somatosensory cortex as a result of these
additional cortical representations of pain.
In recent years, a bilateral cingulotomy (transection of the anterior part
of the cingulum bundle) has served as an effective treatment in relieving the
emotional, agonizing reaction to pain. An isolated lesion in the secondary
somatosensory cortex (S-II) results in minimal sensory loss, but since S-II has
an important function in memory of somatosensory information and sensory
integration, these functions are impaired.
The actual origin of visceral pain is imprecisely localized. Although pain
may originate deep within a visceral structure, such as the heart, the pain may
be “referred to,” and felt, in another, distant somatic structure such as the
left upper limb. Although several explanations have been proposed for this
phenomenon, the following two have the most prominence in the field of
neuroscience.
The convergence–projection theory of visceral pain, suggests that the
central processes of pseudounipolar sensory, general visceral afferent (GVA)
neurons supplying visceral structures and the central processes of general
somatic afferent (GSA) neurons from a somatic structure, such as the upper
limb, enter and terminate at the same spinal cord level. Here they converge
on and synapse with the same interneurons and/or second order neurons
(viscerosomatic neurons) of the ascending pain pathways in the dorsal horn,
and the intermediate gray matter. Nociceptive information is transmitted by
these GSA pathways to higher brain centers.
Second order GSA projection neurons are continuously being activated by GVA
first order neurons, thereby lowering the threshold of stimulation of the second
order neurons. Consequently, nociceptive sensory information is relayed by the
neurons of the GSA pathway to higher brain centers. Thus, GVA nociceptive
input is transmitted via the spinoreticular fibers to the reticular formation, the
thalamus, and the hypothalamus. The nociceptive signal is subsequently
relayed to the region of the somesthetic cortex that normally receives somatic
information from other areas, such as the upper limb, and the brain interprets it
as if the pain were coming from that somatic structure (upper limb). Therefore,
it is the area(s) of the cerebral cortex, in this case the somatosensory cortex,
wherein the signals terminate, and not the stimulus, the receptor, or the
information, that establishes the localization of the sensation.
A curious phenomenon has been reported by individuals who have had a limb
amputated. These individuals experience pain or tingling sensations that feel
as if they were coming from the amputated limb, just as if that limb were still
present. Although the mechanism of phantom limb pain is not understood, the
following two possible explanations are offered.
If a sensory pathway is activated anywhere along its course, nerve
impulses are generated that travel to the CNS where they initiate neural activity. This neural activity ultimately “creates” sensations that feel as though they
originated in the nonexistent limb.
Another possibility is that since there is no touch, pressure, or proprioceptive information transmitted to the CNS from the peripheral processes of the
sensory neurons that initially innervated the amputated limb, there are no
impulses from touch fibers to attenuate the relaying of nociceptive impulses
to the nociceptive pathways, enhancing nociceptive transmission and pain
sensation (see the gate control theory of pain, below). Since nociception is not as
localized, cortical areas corresponding to the phantom limb will be activated.
Although the CNS is constantly flooded with sensory
information, it can prevent
and/or suppress the flow of
some of the incoming nociceptive signals at the local circuitry level of the spinal cord
dorsal horn (and spinal trigeminal nucleus of the brainstem).
The CNS can also do this at the level of the descending opioid
and nonopioid analgesia-producing pathways that originate
in the brainstem, and terminate at the relay sensory nuclei of
the ascending sensory systems.
Rubbing a painful area
(activation of touch Aδ/Aβ
fibers) reduces the sensation
of pain. It has been proposed that the substantia gelatinosa
(lamina II) of the dorsal horn gray matter is the site where
pain is filtered by modulation of the sensory nociceptive
input to the spinothalamic pain and temperature pathway
neurons. The theory proposed to explain this phenomenon,
known as the gate control theory of pain, suggests that the
neural circuitry of the substantia gelatinosa (SG) functions as
follows (Fig. 10.25).
The activity of nociceptive unmyelinated C fibers and
thinly myelinated Aδ fibers terminating in the SG transmit
nociceptive impulses by: (i) inhibiting the SG inhibitory
interneuron; and (ii) simultaneously activating the second
order spinothalamic tract neuron that projects to the thalamus, “keeping the gate open.”
The touch Aδ/Aβ myelinated fibers activate the inhibitory
interneuron as well as the second order neuron. However,
the inhibitory interneuron, via presynaptic inhibition of the
C/Aδ and Aδ/Aβ fibers, prevents impulses from reaching
the second order spinothalamic neuron. When someone
injures his fingers, for example, he usually rubs the painful
area. The rubbing probably stimulates the Aδ/Aβ fibers,
which in turn—via the inhibitory interneuron—inhibit the
transmission of some of the nociceptive impulses to higher
brain centers, providing some relief from pain.
Although it was known for
many years that opiates, a
group of drugs derived from
opium (e.g., morphine) provide powerful relief from pain, their mode of action was not
understood. It is now known that the opiates bind to “opiate
receptors” on specific nerve cells residing in certain areas
of the CNS. It was then speculated that, for the nervous system to have “opiate receptors,” it must synthesize its own
endogenous, opiate-like substances that bind to the “opiate
receptors,” which probably modulate afferent nociceptive
transmission. Three groups of related endogenous opioid
peptides have been identified: enkephalin (G. enkephalin,
“in the head”), beta-endorphin (“morphine within”), and
dynorphin (dynamo + morphine) all of which are known to
bind to the same receptors as the opioid drugs.
During a stressful or emotional experience, regions
associated with the processing of emotions—namely the telencephalon (frontal cortex), the diencephalon (hypothalamus), and the limbic system—project to and stimulate the
enkephalin-releasing neurons of the periaqueductal gray
matter and other nearby regions of the midbrain. The axons
of these enkephalin-releasing neurons form excitatory
synapses primarily with the serotonin-releasing neurons of
the raphe nucleus magnus and the nucleus gigantocellularis of the rostral medullary reticular formation. Since
these neurons release serotonin, they are said to form the
serotonergic-opioid peptide analgesic system, which modulates nociception. In addition to the serotonergicopioid
peptide analgesic system, there is a norepinephrine (adrenergic, nonopioid) analgesic system that arises from the
dorsolateral pontine reticular formation and terminates in
the SG of the spinal cord, and also functions in modulating
nociception (see discussion below).
The axons of the serotonin-releasing neurons from the
raphe nucleus magnus and the nucleus gigantocellularis
descend bilaterally in the lateral funiculus of all spinal cord
levels to terminate in the SG of the dorsal horn. Here they
form excitatory synapses with the inhibitory interneurons,
which release the opioid peptides, enkephalin or dynorphin.
These interneurons establish axoaxonic synapses with the
central processes of the Aδ and C first order nociceptive
neurons.
The modulation of nociception occurs in the following
fashion. Upon stimulation of the free nerve ending of a pain
fiber, the central process of this first order neuron releases
substance P, a neurotransmitter believed to function in the
transmission of nociceptive information, that excites the second order nociceptive relay neurons in the dorsal horn. If the
serotonin-releasing neurons excite the inhibitory interneurons of the SG, these interneurons in turn inhibit the central
processes of the first order neurons. Since this inhibition
occurs before the impulse reaches the synapse, it is referred to
as presynaptic inhibition (Fig. 10.26). Thus these nociceptive
incoming impulses are filtered by being suppressed at their
first relay station in the spinal cord, by the SG inhibitory
interneurons releasing enkephalin or dynorphin. This inhibition occurs because the central processes of these first order
neurons possess receptors for enkephalin and dynorphin
(opioid receptors) in their axolemma.
There is additional evidence suggesting that there are
indeed opioid receptors in the axolemma of the central
terminals of the first order nociceptive, substance P-releasing
neurons terminating in the SG. This evidence is gathered
from reports that naloxone, an opioid antagonist, selectively
prevents the blocking of substance P release by the central
processes of the first order neurons.
Another brainstem region, the dorsolateral pontine reticular
formation (Fig. 10.27), is the site of origin of a norepinephrine
(adrenergic, nonopioid) analgesic pathway that descends in
the dorsolateral funiculus of the spinal cord to synapse in the
SG (lamina II). Fibers of this pathway make synaptic contact
with inhibitory interneurons of the SG (that may release
gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA)), thus ultimately leading
to the inhibition of the second order projection neurons that
reside in lamina V of the dorsal horn of the nociceptive pathway. Unlike the descending opioid analgesic pathways, the
effects of the adrenergic (norepinephrine-releasing) pathway
are not blocked by naloxone.
Classically, the nociceptive
system has been thought
of as a sensory system that
transmits pain signals from
peripheral structures to the
spinal cord, brainstem, and higher brain centers. Afferent
nociceptive input may be modulated at the dorsal horn level,
filtering some of the pain signals, preventing them from
being transmitted to higher brain centers.
Recent studies indicate that not only modulation but also
“plastic” alterations may be induced in peripheral nerve terminals, the spinal cord, and the brain in response to a noxious
insult. These modifications may enhance the magnitude of
nociception and may be a factor in the development of pain
that may last only days, or may become persistent and last for
months, years, or may become permanent.
This woman has a primarily
sensory disturbance that involves
the distal extremities bilaterally. Severe
sensory disturbance, even in the
absence of motor deficits or cerebellar
abnormality, often leads to gait ataxia or
incoordination of the hands depending
on whether the feet and/or hands are
involved. Therefore, the cerebellum is not
necessarily involved, but it may be a good
idea to check it with imaging.
The first thing to determine in this
case is whether the sensory dysfunction
is from pathology in the CNS or the
peripheral nervous system (PNS) (e.g.
peripheral neuropathy). The PNS can be
evaluated by nerve conductions, which
reveal how well an electric impulse is
conducted by a peripheral nerve. The
CNS and the nerve roots can be evaluated
by radiologic imaging, particularly MRI.
In the present case, nerve conductions
were essentially normal. Other tests
indicate normal nerve roots. These tests
indicate that the CNS should be evaluated
closely. The brisk reflexes in the legs,
particularly at the ankles, also indicate
peripheral neuropathy is unlikely. MRI of
the brain and spinal cord is unrevealing.
Laboratory tests to check for a metabolic,
or possibly a genetic, cause of pathology
to the sensory pathways in the CNS are
indicated.
Laboratory tests indicate that this
patient has subacute combined
degeneration, secondary to vitamin B12
deficiency. Vitamin B12 is a cofactor in
enzymatic reactions that are critical for
DNA synthesis and neurologic function.
Deficiency leads to degeneration of white
matter in general, but the posterior
columns in the spinal cord tend to be
affected early and prominently. The
reason for this predilection is not clear.
Motor fibers of the corticospinal tract in
the spinal cord are also affected relatively
early and can lead to bilateral leg weakness. Dementia from degeneration in the
brain and visual disturbance from optic
nerve involvement may also occur.
Pernicious anemia is an autoimmune
disease of gastric parietal cells that
ultimately leads to decreased absorption
of vitamin B12 from the small intestine.
Treatment with vitamin B12
supplementation is very effective if
the disorder is caught early.
A 45-year-old man complains
of left foot drop which started 5
months ago. This was very subtle at first,
but has been getting progressively worse.
The patient can now barely lift his left
foot up. He walks with difficulty. More
recently he has noticed some clumsiness
of his left hand. Upon further questioning
he admits to frequent “twitching” of the
muscles in his distal lower limbs (particularly in the calf), forearms, and shoulders.
His family thinks he has lost some weight.
There is no numbness, tingling, pain, or
any other neurologic symptom noted.
Family history is negative for any
neurologic disorder.
Examination shows severe weakness
and flaccidity of left ankle dorsiflexion
and mild weakness of the intrinsic left
hand muscles and left finger extension.
Otherwise, strength seems adequate.
There is atrophy noted in the muscles
of the left hand and the left pretibial
muscles. Fasciculations are noted in
several muscle groups of the legs, arms,
and back. Deep tendon reflexes are
pathologically brisk in the arms and
legs bilaterally. A Babinski response
is present bilaterally. The rest of the
neurologic exam was unremarkable.
Motor activity is controlled by intricate interactions of three
major regions of the brain: the cerebral cortex, the basal ganglia, and the cerebellum. The cerebral cortex, the ultimate
command center of the nervous system, is involved in the
planning and execution of complex voluntary motor activities. The basal ganglia function in the initiation of movement,
and modulation of the motor cortex. The cerebellum receives
information from the cerebral cortex, as well as the visual,
auditory, vestibular, and somatosensory systems, which it
integrates and utilizes to plan, modify, and coordinate movement. This information enables the cerebellum to play a role
in the timing, speed, direction, and precision of motor activity. The motor cortex relays information to the cerebellum
about impending movement. This permits the cerebellum to
compare the movement in progress with the movement
about to occur. The cerebellum utilizes all of these data to
adjust the output of the motor cortex, so that movement is
smooth and coordinated. The basal ganglia and the cerebellum exert their influence on the brainstem and spinal cord,
and ultimately on motor activity (at a subconscious level),
indirectly by regulating the output of the motor and premotor cortex, via the thalamus. In contrast, the primary and
secondary motor cortex influence voluntary motor activity
via direct projections to the brainstem cranial nerve motor
nuclei, the reticular formation, and spinal cord, which in turn
send commands to the muscular system (basal ganglia and
cerebellum → thalamus → motor cortex → brainstem and
spinal cord → muscular system → voluntary movement).
Motor activity is controlled
by projections from the primary motor cortex (M-I) and
the secondary motor cortex
(M-II) of the frontal lobe to the brainstem and spinal cord
(Fig. 11.1).
The primary motor cortex
(Brodmann’s area 4) resides
in the precentral gyrus of the
frontal lobe (Fig. 11.1). It has
an important function in the
execution of distinct, well-defined, voluntary motor activity.
Each precentral gyrus controls movement of the contralateral
side of the body. The body is mapped on the primary motor
cortex somatotopically, as an upside down homunculus (L.,
“little person”) (Fig. 11.2). Historically, the homunculus was
originally mapped by microstimulation during brain surgery
on patients with epilepsy, but in recent years the findings
have been confirmed via functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI). The part of the precentral gyrus mediating
movement of the toes is located near its superior aspect,
whereas the part of the precentral gyrus mediating movement of the tongue, lips, and larynx is located near its inferior
aspect (bordering the lateral fissure). A striking characteristic
of the primary motor cortex in humans is that over half of it is
associated with the motor activity of the hands, tongue, lips,
and larynx, reflecting the manual dexterity and ability for
speech that humans possess. It also influences the motor
control of the axial and girdle musculature, specifically the
control of the distal muscles of the upper and lower limbs (i.e.,
the muscles controlling movements of the hands and feet).
In recent years, fMRI studies have provided functional
maps of alterations in the oxygen concentration in cerebral
vasculature which accompanies neural activity in the
brain. Figure 11.3 (for color version, see website) shows the
somatotopic organization of the primary motor cortex of
eight subjects participating in a study involving the voluntary movement of their fingers, toes, or elbow. The first four
subjects (S1–S4) were asked to flex-extend their right fingers,
and then their right toes. The second group of four subjects
(S5–S8) were asked to flex-extend their right fingers and then
their right elbow. The fMRI images of the first four subjects
show the region of the primary motor cortex that was active
during finger and toe movement, whereas the fMRI images
of the second group show the region of the primary motor
cortex that was active during finger and elbow movement.
Nerve cells in the primary motor cortex are organized into
groups, each group sending its axons to the cranial nerve
motor nuclei, or the reticular formation in the brainstem, or the
spinal cord gray matter, where they control the motor activity
of a single muscle. The total cortical area that mediates motor
activity of a particular body region, is proportional to the
complexity of the motor activity produced in that region.
The secondary motor cortex
consists of four regions:
the supplementary motor
area, the premotor cortex,
the frontal eye field, and the
posterior parietal motor area
(Fig. 11.1). The first three of these motor cortical areas
reside in the frontal lobe (rostral to the central sulcus); the
posterior parietal motor area is located in the parietal lobe.
The principal function of the secondary motor cortex is the
programing of complex motor activity, which is then relayed
to the primary motor cortex, where the execution of motor
activity is initiated. The primary motor cortex then conveys
this input mainly to the brainstem or to the spinal cord. Thus,
the majority of nerve signals that are generated in the secondary motor cortex cause complex movements produced
by groups of muscles performing a task, unlike the discrete
muscle contractions elicited by stimulation of the primary
motor cortex.
The supplementary motor area (SMA) lies in Brodmann’s
area 6. This area has important functions in the programing
phase of the patterns and sequences of elaborate movements,
and coordination of movements occurring on the two sides
of the body. This cortical area is associated with muscle
contractions of the axial (trunk) and proximal limb (girdle)
musculature (i.e., muscles controlling movement of the
arm and thigh).
The premotor cortex (PMC) resides in most of
Brodmann’s area 6, on the lateral aspect of the frontal lobe.
The principal function of this area is the motor control of
the axial and proximal limb (girdle) musculature. It also
functions in guiding or turning the body and the upper
limbs toward a desired (or appropriate) direction. Once an
intended movement has begun and is in progress, activity in
the PMC decreases, reflecting its key function in the planning
phase of motor activity.
The frontal eye field (FEF) occupies Brodmann’s area 8.
This region is located rostral to the premotor area, on the
frontal lobe. The FEF functions in the coordination of eye
movements, particularly movements mediating voluntary
visual tracking of a moving object.
The posterior parietal motor area (PMA) corresponds to
Brodmann’s areas 5 and 7. Area 5 is involved in tactile discrimination (the ability to perceive a subtle distinction by the
sense of touch) and stereognosis (the recognition of the threedimensional shape of an object by the sense of touch). Area 7
is involved with movements that require visual guidance.
Thus, when one reaches for a glass of cold water, visual guidance (turning the body and aiming the upper limb in the
direction of the glass) and tactile sensation (which in this case
helps to realize that the glass is slippery and must be grasped
firmly), both play a role in accomplishing a desired motor
task.
The cerebral cortex consists
of six histologically distinct
layers (Fig. 11.4). The internal pyramidal layer (layer
V), the most conspicuous
layer of the motor cortex,
contains the somata of the pyramidal cells. These cells constitute the main output neurons, which contribute to the cortical
descending motor pathways, the corticospinal and corticonuclear (corticobulbar) tracts that terminate in the spinal
cord and brainstem, respectively. The older term corticobulbar (cortico, “cortex;” bulbar, “medulla”) referred to all of the
cortical projections that terminate in the cranial nerve nuclei
located in the brainstem. Since not all cranial nerve nuclei are
located in the medulla, this older term was replaced with the
newer term “corticonuclear” in 1998. The corticonuclear tract
includes all cortical projections to the cranial nerve nuclei
located in the midbrain, pons, and medulla. Nerve signals
arising from the motor cortex elicit skeletal muscle contractions in various parts of the body. All of the pyramidal cell
fibers release glutamate, an excitatory neurotransmitter, that
stimulates excitatory or inhibitory interneurons, or less
commonly, lower motoneurons, directly.
There are seven descending motor pathways that ultimately exert their influence on muscle activity (Table 11.1).
Three of these pathways, the lateral corticospinal, the 
anterior corticospinal, and the corticonuclear tracts derive
their fibers from the sensorimotor cortex, whereas the other
four tracts, the tectospinal, rubrospinal, reticulospinal, and
vestibulospinal tracts, derive their fibers from the brainstem.
All of the descending tracts terminate in the spinal cord with
the exception of the corticonuclear tract, which terminates
in the brainstem.
Approximately two-thirds of
the corticospinal tract fibers
(Fig. 11.5) originate from the
pyramidal cell layer of the
frontal cortex; that is, onethird arise from Brodmann’s area 4, and one-third from area
6 (mostly from the supplementary motor area, with some
fibers from the premotor cortex). The other third of the corticospinal tract fibers arise from the parietal cortex; specifically
from the posterior parietal motor area (Brodmann’s areas 5
and 7) and the somatosensory cortex (Brodmann’s areas 3,
1, and 2). The pyramidal cells are referred to as the upper
motoneurons of the descending motor pathways. Their
axons descend to synapse in the spinal cord gray matter with:
• interneurons, which in turn synapse with motoneurons;
• alpha motoneurons, which innervate skeletal muscle
fibers; or
• gamma motoneurons, which innervate the contractile
portion of muscle spindles (muscle stretch receptors).
Unlike the upper motoneurons, the fibers arising from
neurons residing in the somatosensory cortex descend to
synapse with second order sensory neurons in the somatic
relay nuclei of the ascending sensory pathways (and thus
are not considered to be upper motoneurons). There they
influence motor activity by modulating the transmission of
sensory information to higher brain centers (see below). Both
the cell bodies and axon terminals of the upper motoneurons
(arising from the motor cortical areas) and the somatosensory
neurons (arising from Brodmann’s areas 3, 1, 2, 5, and 7)
reside entirely within the central nervous system (CNS).
As the fibers of the upper motoneurons (from the primary and secondary motor cortex) and the somatosensory
fibers (from the somatosensory cortex) begin their descent,
they traverse the corona radiata and then course through the
posterior limb of the internal capsule near its genu (Fig. 11.6).
As the fibers continue their descent, they gradually come to
occupy the posterior half (or posterior third) of the posterior
limb of the internal capsule. When they reach the mesencephalon, they are located in the middle third of the crus
cerebri (basis pedunculi). The corticospinal tract continues
inferiorly through the brainstem where it disperses into
bundles in the basal pons and then reassembles to form a distinct bundle known as the pyramid (a protuberance on the
ventral aspect of the medulla).
Approximately 85–90% of the axons of the corticospinal
tract decussate in the caudal medulla, forming the pyramidal
decussation (Table 11.1). These axons then descend in the lateral funiculus (L., “cord”) of the entire length of the spinal
cord, as the lateral corticospinal tract, where they terminate
primarily in the cervical, lumbar, and sacral spinal cord levels
(Figs 11.7, 11.8). The remaining 10–15% of the corticospinal
tract axons do not decussate but descend ipsilaterally in the
anterior funiculus as the smaller, anterior corticospinal tract.
Axons of the anterior corticospinal tract terminate mainly in
the anterior (ventral) horn gray matter of the cervical and
upper thoracic spinal cord.
The lateral corticospinal tract contains mostly crossed fibers;
however, a small percentage of its fibers are uncrossed. This
tract contains among its fibers a group of large-diameter
myelinated axons arising from the giant Betz cells residing in
the primary motor cortex.
Most of the lateral corticospinal tract upper motoneurons
projecting to the cervical and lumbosacral spinal cord, end in
the lateral intermediate zone gray matter (a region of the
spinal cord gray matter that is populated by interneurons,
and is thus similar to the reticular formation of the brainstem,
which also contains interneurons), as well as the anterior
(ventral) horn gray matter (containing interneurons and
lower motoneurons), where they form excitatory synapses
with interneurons. Both the excitatory and inhibitory
interneurons synapse with lower motoneurons. Excitatory
interneurons stimulate the lower motoneurons to cause
muscle to contract, whereas the inhibitory interneurons inhibit
the lower motoneurons (and may cause muscle to relax). The
first order afferent fibers transmitting sensory input from
the muscle spindles also establish synaptic contacts with the
inhibitory interneurons (receiving input from the corticospinal fibers) in the spinal cord, mediating reflex activity. In
contrast, a small number of the lateral corticospinal tract
upper motoneurons project to the anterior (motor) horns of
the spinal cord, where they form excitatory synapses directly
with lower motoneurons. Many of these monosynaptic connections are with lower motoneurons innervating muscles
of the hand.
The giant pyramidal cells, referred to as Betz cells, are
located exclusively in the primary motor cortex and contribute approximately 3% of the one million fibers in the
corticospinal tract. The large-diameter (up to 20 µm) axons of
most of the Betz cells descend to synapse only in the lumbar
and sacral levels of the spinal cord. Due to their large, myelinated axons, the Betz cells are capable of the fastest nerve
impulse transmission to the spinal cord. The remaining (97%)
of the corticospinal fibers consist of small-diameter (1–4 µm),
slower impulse-conducting fibers. The Betz cell fibers descend to terminate in the lumbar and sacral spinal cord levels
where they synapse directly with the lower motoneurons
that innervate the musculature of the lower limb. These
monosynaptic connections of Betz cells with the lower
motoneurons innervating the muscles of the lower limb are
actually fewer in number than the monosynaptic connections
to lower motoneurons innervating the hand.
Although the lateral corticospinal tract contains mostly
crossed fibers, it also contains a minor group of fibers
(approximately 2–3%), that do not cross at the pyramidal
decussation, but instead descend ipsilaterally. Thus, the lateral corticospinal tract contains both crossed and uncrossed
fibers. At their termination, the uncrossed fibers synapse
with the spinal cord interneurons mediating movement of
the axial (trunk) and proximal limb (girdle) musculature. The
uncrossed fibers are associated with the maintenance of
upright posture and general orientation of the limbs.
The lateral corticospinal tract mediates the execution of
rapid, skilled, voluntary movements of the distal musculature of the upper and lower limbs (i.e., the intrinsic and
extrinsic muscles of the hand and foot, especially the muscles
of the hand).
The upper motoneurons of the anterior corticospinal tract
do not decussate in the caudal medulla. Instead, they
descend in the anterior funiculus of the spinal cord to terminate mainly in the anterior horn gray matter of the cervical
and upper thoracic spinal cord levels. Near their termination,
these fibers decussate to the opposite side of the spinal cord
via the anterior white commissure to synapse with interneurons that in turn synapse with lower motoneurons. Other
fibers of the anterior corticospinal tract decussate to the opposite side near their termination and instead synapse directly
with lower motoneurons, innervating the axial musculature
(such as those of the neck, shoulder, and trunk) as well as the
proximal upper limb (girdle) musculature.
Approximately 55% of all of the corticospinal fibers terminate
at cervical levels of the spinal cord, 20% terminate at thoracic
levels, and the remaining 25% terminate at lumbar and sacral
levels of the spinal cord (Fig. 11.8). The large number of
corticospinal fibers terminating at cervical spinal cord levels
is an indication of the extensive influence they exert on
neurons affecting the motor activity of the upper limb musculature, especially that of the hand.
Corticospinal fibers arising from the somatosensory cortex
terminate in the dorsal (sensory) horn of the spinal cord,
where they synapse with second order afferent sensory neurons to modulate sensory input (Fig. 11.9). The corticospinal
fibers influencing motor activity arise from the motor cortical
areas and terminate primarily in the intermediate zone and
ventral horn gray matter of the spinal cord, where they
synapse with interneurons (which in turn synapse with lower
motoneurons); whereas a small number of the corticospinal
fibers terminate in the ventral horn of the spinal cord, where
they synapse directly with lower motoneurons.
The anterior and lateral corticospinal tracts decrease in
size at successively lower spinal cord levels, as more and
more of their fibers reach their terminations.
The cell bodies of the lower motoneurons serving the
axial (trunk) and the upper and lower limb musculature,
reside in the anterior (motor) horns of the spinal cord. More
specifically, the cell bodies of the lower motoneurons serving
the trunk muscles occupy the medial aspect of the ventral
horns, whereas the cell bodies of the lower motoneurons
serving the upper and lower limbs reside in the lateral aspect
of the ventral horns (Fig. 11.10). The fibers of the lower
motoneurons collect to emerge from the spinal cord as the
motor roots of spinal nerves that are a component of the
peripheral nervous system.
Although the fibers of the corticospinal tracts terminate
principally in the spinal cord, they distribute collaterals to
widespread regions of the nervous system in their descent.
Collaterals terminate in the ventral nuclei of the thalamus,
the basal ganglia, the reticular formation, the red nucleus, the
pontine nuclei, the posterior column nuclei, the posterior
(sensory) horn of the spinal cord, and the intermediolateral
(lateral) cell column (sympathetic) of the spinal cord. Thus,
the corticospinal tract probably has more than one function at
various levels of the neuronal axis.
The primary somatosensory area, located in the postcentral
gyrus (Brodmann’s areas 3, 1, and 2), also projects fibers
involved in motor activity to the brainstem and spinal cord.
The somatosensory fibers join the upper motoneuron fibers
arising from the motor cortex, and accompany them in their
descent as the corticospinal tracts, to terminate primarily in
the somatic sensory relay nuclei of the brainstem and the
dorsal horn of the spinal cord. The descending somatosensory fibers, however, do not synapse at their termination,
with interneurons or motoneurons receiving synapses from
the upper motoneurons. Instead, they synapse with the
second order sensory neurons in the somatic sensory relay
nuclei of the sensory ascending pathways (the nucleus gracilis and the nucleus cuneatus of the brainstem), and the
sensory nuclei in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. Their
function there is to influence motor activity by modulating
the sensory information that is relayed to the brainstem and
spinal cord from peripheral structures; thus they are not considered to be upper motoneurons.
Alpha motoneurons innervate the extrafusal fibers of skeletal
muscle, whereas gamma motoneurons innervate the intrafusal fibers (housed within the muscle spindles) that are special stretch receptors dispersed among the extrafusal fibers
of a muscle. During a normal movement, both the alpha and
gamma motoneurons are co-activated. If only the alpha
motoneurons innervating a muscle were stimulated, only the
extrafusal fibers of the muscle would contract, causing the
overall muscle to shorten. Although the intrafusal fibers
would passively shorten (because they are attached via
connective tissue to the extrafusal fibers), their central
noncontractile portion would become slack and be unable to
monitor changes in muscle length. Muscle spindles maintain
their sensitivity to muscle length, even when the muscle is
contracting to a shorter length, via a mechanism known as
alpha-gamma co-activation. As the alpha motoneurons stimulate the extrafusal muscle fibers to contract, simultaneously
the gamma motoneurons stimulate the contractile portions
of the intrafusal fibers to contract. This maintains tension
on the central (noncontractile) region of the intrafusal fibers
where the sensory endings are located. This alpha-gamma
co-activation is necessary to maintain the “stretch sensitivity”
of the intrafusal fibers, so that they are ready to detect the
slightest stretch at any length (or state of contraction) of the
muscle.
The corticonuclear tract
(Figs 11.11, 11.12; Table 11.1)
consists of fibers derived from
the primary motor cortex
(Brodmann’s area 4), the premotor cortex (Brodmann’s
areas 6 and 8), and the somesthetic cortex (Brodmann’s areas
3, 1, and 2). The corticonuclear tract, consisting of fibers of
upper motoneurons, accompanies the corticospinal tract.
The two tracts descend in tandem, traversing the corona
radiata and the internal capsule to reach the crus cerebri
(basis pedunculi) of the midbrain. The corticonuclear tract
descends in the internal capsule, but anterior to the corticospinal fibers. The corticonuclear fibers diverge from the
corticospinal fibers at various brainstem levels to terminate in
their target cranial nerve somatic motor or branchiomotor
nuclei. Similar to the fibers of the corticospinal tracts, some of
the corticonuclear fibers synapse directly with motoneurons,
but the majority of fibers synapse with interneurons housed
within the nucleus of termination or with local interneurons
of the brainstem reticular formation. The interneurons in turn
synapse with the motoneurons of the cranial nerve motor (or
branchiomotor) nuclei. The corticonuclear fibers not only
terminate in the cranial nerve motor nuclei, but also in the
sensory relay nuclei (such as the nucleus gracilis, the nucleus
cuneatus, the sensory nuclei of the trigeminal nerve, and the
nucleus of the solitary tract) and the brainstem reticular
formation. The corticonuclear fibers affect the motor nuclei
of the following cranial nerves: the oculomotor (CN III),
trochlear (CN IV), trigeminal (CN V), abducent (CN VI), facial (CN VII), glossopharyngeal (CN IX), vagus (CN X), spinal
accessory (XI), and hypoglossal (XII). In general, most cranial
nerve motor nuclei receive bilateral projections from the
corticonuclear tracts.
The corticonuclear tract fibers do not project to the oculomotor, trochlear, and abducens nuclei directly. Fibers derived
from the frontal eye field (Brodmann’s area 8) course in the
corticonuclear tracts, to terminate in the mesencephalon,
specifically in the superior colliculus, the pretectal nuclei,
and the accessory oculomotor nuclei. These nuclei then relay
inputs to the motor nuclei of the oculomotor, trochlear, and
abducent nerves that control eye movements.
The remaining corticonuclear fibers continue their descent
to the pontine and medullary levels (Fig. 11.11), where most
of them terminate in the reticular formation to synapse with
interneurons (which in turn synapse with lower motoneurons housed in the cranial nerve motor nuclei). A number of
corticonuclear fibers terminate directly and bilaterally in the
motor nuclei of the trigeminal and facial nerves.
At the upper pontine levels, some of the fibers diverge
from the corticonuclear tract, course into the pontine tegmentum, and terminate bilaterally in the pontine reticular
formation and the motor nucleus of the trigeminal
nerve. The corticonuclear fibers project contralaterally to
the lower motoneurons that supply motor innervation to
the lateral pterygoid muscle, and bilaterally to the lower
motoneurons that innervate the remaining muscles of
mastication.
At the midpontine level some of the corticonuclear fibers
terminate bilaterally in the facial nucleus, which innervates
the muscles of facial expression, the platysma, the posterior
belly of the digastric muscle, and the stylohyoid and
stapedius muscles. The corticonuclear tract projects bilaterally to the lower motoneurons of the facial nucleus that
innervate the muscles of the upper half of the face, whereas
this same tract projects only contralaterally to the lower
motoneurons of the facial nucleus that innervate the muscles
of the lower half of the face (Fig. 11.13).
The remaining corticonuclear fibers terminate in the nucleus
ambiguus at caudal pontine levels, the accessory nucleus at
midmedullary levels, and the hypoglossal nuclei at caudal
medullary levels.
At the caudal pontine levels and rostral medullary levels,
some corticonuclear fibers diverge from the tract to terminate
in the nucleus ambiguus, a motor nucleus of the glossopharyngeal, vagus, and spinal accessory nerves. These three cranial nerves supply motor innervation to the skeletal muscles
of the palate, pharynx, and larynx. The nucleus ambiguus
receives bilateral corticonuclear tract projections. A small
bundle of corticonuclear fibers, Pick’s bundle, proceeds
inferiorly along with the corticospinal tract to the level of
the pyramidal decussation where they cross, then recur and
ascend to terminate in the nucleus ambiguus of the opposite
side.
At midmedullary levels, some corticonuclear fibers
diverge from the corticonuclear tract to terminate primarily
in the ipsilateral accessory nucleus of the spinal accessory
nerve that innervates the sternocleidomastoid and trapezius
muscles.
The remaining corticonuclear fibers terminate in the
hypoglossal nuclei that house the lower motoneurons
that innervate the tongue musculature. The corticonuclear
fibers project contralaterally on the lower motoneurons that
innervate the genioglossus muscle, whereas the remaining
lower motoneurons that innervate all other tongue musculature receive bilateral projections (with a contralateral
predominance).
The visual association areas
(Brodmann’s areas 18 and
19) give rise to the fibers of
the corticotectal tract that
descend to terminate in the
oculomotor accessory nuclei
(the interstitial nucleus of Cajal, or the nucleus of
Darkschewitch) and the deep layers of the superior
colliculus.
The neurons of the oculomotor accessory nuclei give
rise to fibers that join the medial longitudinal fasciculus to
terminate in the oculomotor, trochlear, and abducens nuclei,
where they influence vertical, rotatory, and smooth pursuit
eye movements.
The superior colliculus gives rise to the fibers of the tectospinal tract (Fig. 11.14; Table 11.1), which decussates at the
level of the red nucleus in the midbrain, and then descends to
the medulla, in the medial longitudinal fasciculus. The tectospinal fibers continue their descent in the anterior funiculus
of the spinal cord to end at cervical and upper thoracic spinal
cord levels where they synapse with interneurons. The tectospinal tract is involved in the mediation of reflex movements
of the eyes, and in the cervical and thoracic region of the
trunk elicited by visual, auditory, and vestibular stimuli.
The corticorubral tract arises
from the sensorimotor cortex
(similar to the corticospinal
tract) and terminates in the
ipsilateral red nucleus in the
mesencephalon (Fig. 11.15).
The cell bodies in the
caudal part of the red nucleus give rise to fibers forming the
larger rubrobulbar tract and the smaller rubrospinal tract
(which is insignificant in humans). Both of these tracts decussate in the anterior midbrain tegmentum. As the rubrobulbar
tract descends, some of its fibers terminate in the principal
(main) sensory nucleus of the trigeminal nerve, as well as the
subnucleus oralis of the spinal trigeminal nucleus. As other
rubrobulbar fibers continue their descent in the brainstem,
they terminate in the facial nucleus where they establish
synapses with lower motoneurons innervating the muscles of
the upper half of the face. Still other rubrobulbar fibers terminate in the lateral reticular nucleus, as well as the nucleus
gracilis and nucleus cuneatus in the medulla. The fibers that
terminate in the nucleus gracilis and cuneatus modulate the
transmission of afferent sensory information to the spinal
cord via presynaptic inhibition.
The rubrospinal tract on the other hand, descends in the
lateral funiculus of the spinal cord. Its fibers terminate in the
lateral intermediate zone and anterior horn of the spinal
cord where they synapse with interneurons. The red nucleus
facilitates the alpha, beta, and gamma motoneurons that
innervate the contralateral upper limb flexor muscles,
whereas it simultaneously inhibits those of the extensors,
specifically the nerve cells that innervate the distal muscles of
the upper limbs. This facilitation and inhibition is mediated
by the rubrospinal tract terminating in the spinal cord, and by
the rubrobulbar tract which terminates in the flexor region of
the medullary reticular formation. The rubrospinal tract
(along with the corticospinal tract) functions in controlling
the movement of the hand and digits, by facilitating flexor
muscle tone and inhibiting the extensor musculature of the
upper limb.
The sensorimotor cortex
sends bilateral projections
via the corticoreticular fibers
which course with the corticonuclear and the corticospinal tracts to several
nuclei dispersed in the brainstem (pontine and medullary) reticular formation. The
reticular nuclei also receive an input from the cerebellum,
the vestibular nuclei, and nociceptive fibers from the spinal
cord.
Neurons in the pontine reticular nuclei (reticularis pontis
oralis and caudalis) give rise to fibers that form the medial
(pontine) reticulospinal tract, which descends ipsilaterally
in the anterior funiculus of the spinal cord. These fibers terminate and synapse with spinal cord interneurons and gamma
motoneurons at all levels of the spinal cord. The pontine
reticular fibers stimulate extensor muscle and inhibit flexor
muscle movements (Fig. 11.15).
The lateral (medullary) reticulospinal tract arises from
the nucleus reticularis gigantocellularis and descends bilaterally in the lateral funiculus of the spinal cord. Nerve fibers
terminate at all spinal cord levels, where they synapse mainly
with interneurons in the intermediate zone gray matter of the
spinal cord. The medullary reticular fibers have an inhibitory
effect on extensors and an excitatory affect on flexors. The
lateral reticulospinal tract also relays an autonomic input to
the sympathetic and parasympathetic neurons of the spinal
cord, which mediate autonomic functions such as pupillary
dilation, heart rate modulation, and sweating (Fig. 11.15).
These two tracts influence the motor control of axial
(trunk) and proximal limb musculature and are involved in
posture maintenance and orientation of the limbs in an
intended direction.
The vestibular nuclei receive
sensory input related to head
movement from the vestibular apparatus of the inner ear
via the vestibular division of
the vestibulocochlear nerve
(CN VIII) and to balance from the cerebellum. The lateral
vestibulospinal tract arises from the lateral vestibular
nucleus (Fig. 11.16). This tract contains ipsilateral fibers that
descend in the anterior funiculus to end at all spinal cord
levels, to synapse mainly with excitatory interneurons. These
interneurons stimulate motoneurons that innervate axial
(trunk) and proximal limb extensor muscles, and simultaneously inhibit lower motoneurons that innervate limb flexor
muscles. This tract is involved in the maintenance of posture
and balance by specifically facilitating motoneurons that
innervate the antigravity muscles (extensor muscle tone of
the antigravity muscles). This tract also mediates head and
neck movements in response to vestibular sensory input.
The medial vestibulospinal tract arises from the medial
vestibular nucleus (Fig. 11.16). This tract descends mostly
ipsilaterally in the medial longitudinal fasciculus of the
brainstem, and then in the anterior funiculus of the cervical
and upper half of the thoracic spinal cord. Its fibers synapse
with interneurons that synapse with alpha and gamma
motoneurons. Some fibers terminate on alpha motoneurons
directly. These fibers exert their influence on neurons of the
cervical spinal cord (maintaining equilibrium elicited by
vestibular input), and mediating head movement while
maintaining gaze fixation on an object.
The descending motor pathways are classified into three
functional categories: the ventromedial (anteromedial) group,
the lateral group, and the cortical group. In general, the fibers
of each of these functional groups synapse in the gray matter
that is in close proximity to their position in the white matter.
That is, the fibers of the ventromedial group synapse in the
medial aspect and intermediate zone of the spinal cord gray
matter, whereas the fibers of the lateral group synapse in the
lateral aspect and intermediate zone of the spinal cord gray
matter. Furthermore, the lower motoneurons that innervate
the flexor muscles occupy a region of gray matter that is posterior to the lower motoneurons innervating the extensor
muscles (Figs 11.10A, 11.17).
The ventromedial group consists of the anterior corticospinal tract, the medial and lateral vestibulospinal tracts,
the medial and lateral reticulospinal tracts, and the tectospinal tract, which are all located in the anterior funiculus
of the spinal cord and synapse in the medial aspect of
the anterior horn and intermediate zone (Figs 11.9, 11.17).
These pathways project bilaterally, controlling the axial and
proximal limb musculature of both sides. These tracts function in the bilateral control of gross movements of the axial
and proximal limb musculature for balance maintenance and
during postural adjustments.
The lateral group consists of the lateral corticospinal and
the rubrospinal tracts, located mostly in the lateral funiculus
of the spinal cord. The fibers of these two tracts synapse in the
lateral aspect and intermediate zone of the ventral horn of the
spinal cord (Figs 11.10A, 11.17). The rubrospinal tract extends
only to the first cervical level of the spinal cord and does not
have a very important function in humans. These tracts
(mainly the corticospinal tract) function in the control of, in
particular, the distal but also of the proximal musculature of
the upper and lower limbs, as well as mediating independent
digit movements.
The cortical group consists of lateral corticospinal tract
fibers that synapse directly with lower motoneurons, particularly the neurons whose fibers innervate the distal muscles of
the limbs, such as the intrinsic muscles of the hand. This tract
is involved in independent, fractionated movements of the
digits.
The lower motoneurons are referred to as the final
common pathway because they are influenced by the
corticospinal, tectospinal, rubrospinal, reticulospinal,
vestibulospinal, and reflex neurons. All input is ultimately
funneled to the lower motoneurons that innervate the skeletal muscles directly.
Since the corticospinal tract projects from the cerebral cortex through the
corona radiata, the internal capsule, the cerebral peduncle, the pons, the
medulla, and the entire spinal cord, it is vulnerable to lesions from various
sources throughout its path. The most common corticospinal tract lesion
results from a cerebral vascular accident (a stroke). A stroke can result either
from a vascular hemorrhage or a vascular occlusion resulting from a thrombus
(loose clot or an air bubble). The middle cerebral artery is buried in the lateral
fissure separating the parietal from the temporal lobe, and gives rise to
branches that supply structures in the frontal, parietal, and temporal lobes.
Many of its branches perforate the cerebral hemisphere to reach deep subcortical structures such as the basal ganglia and the internal capsule. A cerebral
vascular accident affecting the internal capsule is referred to as a capsular
stroke. Since both the corticonuclear and corticospinal tracts course in the
internal capsule, a capsular stroke can result in considerable upper motoneuron damage, referred to as an upper motoneuron (UMN) lesion. The
most prominent physical deficit resulting from damage of the corticospinal
tract fibers is a contralateral hemiplegia (paralysis) of the upper and lower
limbs and extensor plantar response (Babinski’s sign). Normally, when the
plantar surface of the foot is stimulated, the foot reflexly plantarflexes (toes
curl down) mediated by the corticospinal tract. In an individual with a corticospinal tract lesion, however, stimulation of the plantar surface of the foot
elicits hyperextension of the foot accompanied by dorsiflexion of the great toe
and by a fanning of the remaining toes (Babinki’s sign). In the absence of the
corticospinal tract, this pathologic response is mediated by the descending
motor pathways arising from the brainstem. An upper motoneuron lesion also
results in spasticity in the affected limb(s). Spasticity results following damage to neurons of the primary motor cortex and neurons of the secondary
motor cortex.
If the corticonuclear tract fibers are damaged, the individual will exhibit
a weakness of the contralateral lower face, and the tongue will deviate
toward the impaired side when the patient attempts to protude it. There is
weakness of the contralateral lower face because the lower half of
the facial motor nucleus receives only contralateral projections from the motor
cortex, whereas the upper half of the facial motor nucleus receives bilateral
projections from the motor cortex.
An individual who has a unilateral lesion confined to the primary motor cortex (M-I), will at first experience a contralateral flaccid paralysis in the
affected muscles on the contralateral side of the body. After about 2 weeks,
the individual will recover function in the affected proximal limb (girdle) muscles; however, the paralysis will persist in the distal muscles of the limbs. This
type of lesion will affect mainly the fine movements of the contralateral distal
limbs, particularly those of the hand. Although there is recovery of some of the
motor functions of the limbs, the individual will not have the fractionated,
independent control of the distal muscles of the limbs. When attempting to flex
a single finger, all fingers flex concurrently. A lesion confined to the primary
motor cortex will not cause a total motor deficit since the tectospinal,
reticulospinal, and vestibulospinal tracts and upper motoneurons from the
secondary motor cortex will supply motor input to the interneurons and
lower motoneurons. Lesions confined to the primary motor cortex are rare.
If the lesion also involves Brodmann’s area 6, the paralysis will persist and
spasticity will appear in the distal limb muscles.
A lesion confined to the supplementary motor area will result in the
inability to coordinate hand movements bilaterally. The individual can execute
the same motor activity with both hands (concurrently); however, when
attempting to simultaneously execute a different motor activity with each
hand, it may seem complicated and impossible to accomplish.
A lesion confined to the premotor cortex typically does not cause paralysis.
Instead, an individual with a lesion in the premotor cortex will have difficulty
executing voluntary movements with the involved body part, contralateral to
the side of the lesion. If the upper limb is affected, the individual will have
difficulty in picking up a glass of water or using a fork, in the absence of perceptible changes in muscle tone, spasticity, or paralysis.
A lower motoneuron (LMN) lesion is a lesion involving: (i) the cell bodies of
the lower motoneurons residing in the cranial nerve motor nuclei or the ventral
horn of the spinal cord; or (ii) the axons of the lower motoneurons coursing in a
cranial nerve or other peripheral nerve. A LMN lesion results in flaccid paralysis and severe atrophy and fasciculations in the denervated muscle(s).
Both the history and the clinical
exam are very important for the
diagnosis in this case. This patient has
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS),
commonly known in the USA as Lou
Gehrig’s disease. This is a neurodegenerative disease affecting only the motor
system. Sensory and cognitive functions
remain intact throughout the disease.
ALS characteristically leads to death of
both the upper motoneurons in the motor
cortex and also the lower motoneurons
in the anterior horns of the spinal cord.
It is the most common of the motoneuron
diseases—diseases which affect,
specifically, the upper and/or lower
motoneurons.
The combination of the signs and
symptoms of ALS is usually unmistakable. Upper motoneuron loss produces
pathologically brisk reflexes, Babinski
reflexes (extension of the big toe in
response to a scratch of the lateral aspect
of the bottom of the foot), and sometimes
spasticity or “stiffness” of an extremity.
Lower motoneuron loss leads to flaccid
weakness, atrophy, and fasciculations.
Both types of lesions can cause weakness.
Head imaging is typically normal.
Electromyography will confirm or refute
the presence of motor neuron disease (that
which affects the lower motoneurons).
This is an electrical test of muscle fiber
physiology, and gives information about
the integrity of the motor unit (a lower
motoneuron, its axon, and all of the
muscle fibers that it innervates).
ALS is a devastating disease. It is more
common in older age groups, but the
average person affected by it is middle
aged or a bit older. This disease leads
to relentless progression of muscle
weakness, causing the individual
to become wheelchair-bound and
eventually incapacitated. Distal muscles
in one arm or leg, or bulbar muscles (e.g.,
speech) are affected first. Any muscle
group can be a target, and eventually
the muscles of breathing become affected.
Death from respiratory failure or another
intervening illness, such as pneumonia,
typically occurs a few or several years
from initial diagnosis. The vast majority
of cases of ALS are sporadic. A small
percentage of cases are hereditary. The
pathophysiology is unknown and there
is no effective treatment.
A 39-year-old man has had
abnormal and uncontrollable
movements for the past 6 months, as
well as forgetfulness, obsessions, and
compulsions. His wife notes some mild
personality changes as well. He has
become somewhat more irritable and
withdrawn. These movements are
spontaneous, unpredictable, and have
become almost continuous. Initially his
wife thought he had become “fidgety.”
Abnormal behaviors as well as the
extraneous movements have caused
some social embarrassment. The patient’s
mother died in her fifties at a psychiatric
hospital. He has no more information
about her. Family history is otherwise
unrevealing.
Examination shows obvious chorea
consisting of involuntary, nonrhythmic,
and persistent jerky movements of the
head, neck, and arms that continue
during conversation. Memory is mildly
diminished. He seems very distractible
and has difficulty completing motor
tasks. Neurologic exam is otherwise
unremarkable. MRI of the brain shows
atrophy of the heads of both caudate
nuclei.
Normal motor function is the result of the intricate interaction of the basal ganglia, cerebellum, and cerebral cortex. The
basal ganglia initiate motor activity and modulate cortical
output related to motor function. The cerebellum functions
in the coordination of movement, whereas the cerebral cortex
is involved in the planning and execution of voluntary movement. The basal ganglia and cerebellum exert their influence
on the brainstem and spinal cord, and ultimately on motor
activity indirectly, by regulating the output of the cerebral
cortex via the thalamus. The cerebral cortex then influences
the execution of motor activity via direct projections to the
brainstem nuclei (i.e., the cranial nerve motor nuclei, nuclei of
the reticular formation, midbrain tectum, and red nucleus)
and spinal cord motoneurons.
The function of the basal ganglia is influenced by input
arising not only from primary sensory and sensory association areas of the cerebral cortex of all four lobes, but also
from the thalamus and brainstem. All four lobes of the cerebrum, the thalamus, and the brainstem project to the input
nuclei of the basal ganglia, mainly to the caudate nucleus
and putamen. These input nuclei then project to the globus
pallidus, which in turn relays basal ganglial output via the
thalamus to the motor and other areas of the frontal cortex
(Fig. 12.1).
Although more is known about the role of the basal
ganglia in motor functions, numerous studies support the
finding that they also have other, nonmotor functions as well.
Disturbances of the neural connections of the basal ganglia
result not only in movement disorders, but also considerable
deficits in other, nonmotor functions including cognition,
perception, and emotional behaviors.
Ultimately, outflow from the basal ganglia reaching the
cerebral cortex has an impact not only on motor activity, but
also on other functions as diverse as sensorimotor integration, and cognitive and emotional behaviors.
The term basal ganglia is a
misnomer since these structures consist of an assortment of subcortical nuclei,
rather than ganglia. The
criterion used by early neuroanatomists for the classification of the basal ganglia was any
structure composed of gray matter that is embedded deep
within, and close to the basal aspect of, the cerebral hemispheres. Thus, previously, the components of the basal
ganglia included the caudate nucleus, putamen, nucleus
accumbens, globus pallidus, thalamus, subthalamic nucleus,
amygdala, and claustrum. In more recent years, however,
neuroanatomists include in the basal ganglia only those deep
nuclei of the cerebrum which, when damaged, produce
movement disorders.
From a clinical perspective, the components of the basal
ganglia involved in motor function are the caudate nucleus,
putamen, globus pallidus, and subthalamic nucleus (all of
which are embedded deep in the cerebral hemispheres), as
well as another nucleus, the substantia nigra, which is really
located in the midbrain, but is functionally related to the
basal ganglia.
The caudate nucleus and the putamen share an embryologic derivation as well as similar morphological characteristics. Hence they are considered to be a single anatomical
structure and are collectively referred to as the striatum
(neostriatum, caudatoputamen) (Tables 12.1, 12.2). The
ventral portions of the head of the caudate nucleus, the putamen, the anterior perforated substance, and the nucleus
accumbens together are referred to as the ventral striatum.
Anatomically, the striatum (caudate nucleus, putamen,
and nucleus accumbens) and the globus pallidus (paleostriatum) collectively form the corpus striatum. The putamen
is the most massive nucleus of the corpus striatum. The
ventral component of the globus pallidus is the ventral
pallidum.
In addition to the components mentioned so far, the
following structures are functionally related to the basal
ganglia: the ventral anterior, ventral lateral, mediodorsal,
and intralaminar nuclei of the thalamus, and the amygdala
of the limbic system (Table 12.3).
In this chapter, the basal ganglia consist of the caudate
nucleus, the lenticular nucleus with its two components (the
putamen and globus pallidus), and the nucleus accumbens;
and, since the subthalamic nucleus of the ventral thalamus and the substantia nigra of the mesencephalon are
functionally connected to the corpus striatum, and produce
movement disorders when damaged, they are also included.
The thalamus, nucleus accumbens, and amygdala do not produce movement disorders when damaged.
It is important to note that the thalamus does not only
serve as a relay nucleus for sensory information to the
somatosensory cortex, but also as a relay nucleus for motor
information that arises from the basal ganglia and the cerebellum that is destined for the motor cortex.
(Fig. 12.2). Its dilated, somewhat bulbous, rostral end is
referred to as the head of the caudate nucleus. It is located
in the lateral wall of the anterior horn of the lateral ventricle
and is continuous ventrally with the putamen (Fig. 12.3).
Near the interventricular foramen, the head is continuous
with the long, curved body of the caudate nucleus, which
courses posteriorly and lies on the floor of the lateral ventricle. Near the posterior end of the thalamus, the body
decreases in diameter and continues as the long, narrow tail
of the caudate nucleus. The tail gradually bends ventrally
and then anteriorly within the lateral ventricle passing along
the roof of its inferior horn and extending into the temporal
lobe as far anteriorly as the amygdaloid nucleus. The internal
capsule separates the caudate nucleus from the lenticular
nucleus.
The biconvex lenticular
nucleus is located between
the insula and the anterior
and posterior limbs of the internal capsule. It is separated
from the caudate nucleus by the anterior limb of the internal
capsule and from the thalamus by the posterior limb of the
internal capsule. The lenticular nucleus is divided by myelinated fibers, the lateral (external) medullary lamina, into its
two component parts: the laterally positioned, convex putamen and the medially placed globus pallidus (Fig. 12.4).
The globus pallidus (L. globus, “globe;” pallidus, “pale”)
is wedge-shaped on coronal and horizontal sections. Due to
its many myelinated fibers it appears paler in fresh specimens
than the putamen. A group of myelinated fibers, the medial
(internal) medullary lamina, divides the globus pallidus into
a medial (internal, inner) segment (GPm) and a lateral (external,
outer) segment (GPl). The GPm is embryologically related to
the diencephalon and the subthalamus (ventral thalamus),
and gives rise to the major output from the basal ganglia.
Although, as indicated above, the lenticular nucleus and
the caudate nucleus are separated by the internal capsule, the
rostral extent of the putamen is connected to the head of
the caudate nucleus by bridge-like extensions of gray matter.
During early developmental stages, the growing axons of the
internal capsule perforated the gray matter of the fused caudate nucleus and putamen (Fig. 12.2). These extensions form
a distinct ventral portion of the striatum, the ventral striatum,
which via its connections is associated with the limbic system. The intervals between these extensions are traversed
by the somewhat vertically oriented, slender but prominent
fiber bundles of the anterior limb of the internal capsule (see
Fig. 12.3). Thus, in fresh brain sections, the region between
the caudate nucleus and the lenticular nucleus exhibits
alternating stripes of gray matter and white matter. It was
named the corpus striatum (L., “striped body”) based on this
striping pattern. The nucleus accumbens is a
component of the striatum.
It resides ventral to the
anterior limb of the internal
capsule and is connected to the caudate nucleus and the putamen. It receives input information from the limbic system
and is involved in the processing of the emotional aspects of
movement (see Fig. 12.2). The subthalamic nucleus, a
component of the subthalamus, is an oval-shaped,
biconvex mass of gray matter that lies lateral to the hypothalamus on the medial aspect of the internal capsule
(Fig. 12.5). Its function is not known. The substantia nigra (L.,
“black substance”) extends
from the rostral end to the
caudal end of the mesencephalon dorsal to the cerebral peduncle. It is composed of two distinct parts: a
ventral, cell-sparse, reticular part, the pars reticulata (reticularis) and a dorsal, cellular, compact part, the pars compacta
(Fig. 12.6).
The cell-sparse pars reticulata consists of: (i) neuron
terminals arising from the midbrain raphe nuclei, which release serotonin; and (ii) striatonigral nerve terminals, which
release gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA). Although the
pars reticulata contains numerous nerve terminals, it is a
nuclear structure and also contains nerve cell bodies. The
pars reticulata is continuous with, and shares many histologic characteristics with, the medial segment of the globus
pallidus. Furthermore, similar to the globus pallidus, this
portion of the substantia nigra receives projections from the
striatum and sends its GABAergic neurons to the thalamus.
Both the medial segment of the globus pallidus, and the pars
reticulata of the substantia nigra, give rise to the output of the
basal ganglia; due to their similarities and continuity they are
considered to be the same structure.
The cellular pars compacta consists of pigmented
dopaminergic neurons containing neuromelanin. These
neurons give rise to the nigrostriatal dopaminergic pathway
that projects to the striatum. More over, the dendritic extensions of these dopaminergic neurons extend into the pars
reticulata.
The ventral anterior and
the ventral lateral nuclei
of the dorsal thalamus
(often referred to as the
“thalamic motor nuclei”)
relay movement-related signals from the basal ganglia to the
frontal cortex.
The medial dorsal nucleus of the thalamus relays signals
from the basal ganglia to frontal cortex association areas as
well as to limbic areas. These areas play a role in cognitive
functions and the processing of emotions, respectively. 
The centromedian and parafascicular nuclei, two of the
intralaminar nuclei of the thalamus representing the rostral
extent of the ascending reticular activating system (ARAS),
receive inputs from the spinothalamic, trigeminothalamic,
and multisynaptic ascending pathways (of the reticular
formation) relaying pain sensation. These nuclei relay this
information to the somatosensory areas of the cerebral cortex
and the caudate nucleus, putamen, and ventral striatum (see
Fig. 12.5; Table 12.3). Based on these connections, these nuclei
are believed to function in sensorimotor integration. In addition, as a result of their diffuse cortical connections, they are
believed to be involved in the maintenance of arousal of the
organism as it relates to pain.
The amygdaloid nucleus is
located in the temporal lobe,
deep to the uncus. Although
the amygdaloid nucleus is
related to the basal ganglia
via neural connections, it is anatomically and functionally
part of the limbic system (Fig. 12.7; Table 12.3).
The claustrum consists of a slender layer of gray matter,
which is separated medially from the convex surface of the
putamen by the external capsule, and laterally from the
insula by a thin layer of white matter, the extreme capsule.
Connections to the basal ganglia have not been established,
and its function is as yet unknown (Fig. 12.8; Table 12.3).
The basal ganglia are intricately and extensively interconnected with various regions of the central nervous system
(CNS). Viewed from the perspective of their connections, the component nuclei of the basal ganglia may be assigned into
three categories: input nuclei, intrinsic nuclei, and output
nuclei (Table 12.4).
The caudate nucleus, putamen, and the nucleus accumbens are the input nuclei
of the basal ganglia. They
receive a prominent excitatory input from all four lobes of the
cerebral cortex as well as from the thalamus, subthalamus,
substantia nigra, and other brainstem structures. Most of the
input terminates in the caudate nucleus and the putamen.
These input nuclei then relay the information to the intrinsic
and output nuclei. The caudate nucleus and the putamen
function in the initiation and modulation of gross voluntary
movements that are performed at the subconscious level,
whereas the nucleus accumbens is associated with the processing of the emotional aspects of movement.
The intrinsic nuclei consist
of the lateral segment of the
globus pallidus, the subthalamic nucleus, and the pars
compacta of the substantia
nigra. These nuclei are not
only interconnected by their local circuit projections, but are
also connected with the input and output nuclei. Although
the subthalamic nucleus is a source of excitatory signals, most
local synapses are inhibitory.
Both the globus pallidus and the subthalamic nucleus
function in the control of the axial and girdle (proximal limb)
musculature. The responsibility of these nuclei is to position
and stabilize the trunk and proximal parts of the upper and
lower limbs, so that the distal limb musculature moving the
hands and feet are able to perform the more discreet movements that are controlled by the motor cortex. This concept is
consistent with the observation that neural activity in the
globus pallidus precedes that of the motor cortex.
The output nuclei consist of
the medial segment of the
globus pallidus, the pars reticulata of the substantia nigra,
and the ventral pallidum.
Output from the basal ganglia is inhibitory (GABAergic),
passing from the medial segment of the globus pallidus and
from the pars reticulata of the substantia nigra mainly to the
thalamus, via the pallidothalamic and nigrothalamic fibers,
respectively. However, fibers from these nuclei also project
to the subthalamic nuclei, the brainstem, and the cerebral
cortex.
The basal ganglia exert their influence on motor activity
indirectly by controlling the premotor and supplementary
motor areas of the cerebral cortex, and not by direct projections to the brainstem and spinal cord motoneurons. Note
that although all four lobes of the cerebral cortex project to
the basal ganglia, output from the basal ganglia terminates
exclusively in the frontal lobe of the cerebrum.
The basal ganglia have the following characteristics:
• they receive input fibers from various sources outside the
basal ganglia;
• they are interconnected by local (intrinsic) fiber projections; and
• they project output fibers to other areas of the brain that
are involved in motor function.
The caudate nucleus and the putamen are the principal
input nuclei of the basal ganglia. The caudate nucleus is
associated primarily with cognitive functions and less with
motor activity, whereas the putamen is associated primarily
with motor functions. The caudate nucleus and putamen
receive the following afferent (input) fibers (Fig. 12.9;
Table 12.5):
• corticostriate fibers;
• thalamostriate fibers;
• nigrostriate fibers;
• fibers from the ventral tegmental area; and
• fibers from the brainstem pedunculopontine tegmental
nucleus (PPN).
The corticostriate fibers arise from widespread areas of
the cerebral cortex (neocortex), mainly from its motor and
somatosensory areas. Each cortical part projects fibers that
descend in the internal or external capsules to the caudate
nucleus and the putamen, and they release the excitatory
neurotransmitters glutamate or aspartate at their termination.
Fibers arising from the primary sensory (Brodmann’s areas 3,
1, and 2), primary motor (Brodmann’s area 4), premotor
(Brodmann’s area 6), and supplementary motor (Brodmann’s
area 6) cortex terminate principally in the putamen. Fibers
arising from the frontal eye fields (Brodmann’s area 8) and
association areas of the cortex terminate principally in the
caudate nucleus. Moreover, some corticostriate fibers arising
from the motor and premotor cortices terminate in the subthalamic nucleus of the striatum.
The intralaminar (centromedian and parafascicular) nuclei of
the thalamus are the cranial continuation of the midbrain
reticular formation into the diencephalon and are components of the reticular activating system (RAS). These nuclei
receive nociceptive signals via reticulothalamic fibers (of the
anterolateral system) and, as components of the RAS, function in alerting the individual and to elicit responses that will
enable it to evade painful stimuli.
The thalamostriate fibers are excitatory, they terminate
mainly in the putamen and the caudate nucleus, and they
release glutamate. In addition, the striatum also receives
input fibers from the ventral anterior and ventral lateral
nuclei of the thalamus. The function of these latter projections
is not yet known.
The nigrostriate fibers arise from the pars compacta of the
substantia nigra and terminate primarily in the caudate
nucleus, although some fibers terminate in the putamen.
These predominantly uncrossed fibers are inhibitory or excitatory and release dopamine at their termination.
The fibers from the ventral tegmental area terminate
primarily in the nucleus accumbens of the ventral striatum,
and the cerebral cortex. These projections function in the initiation of behavioral responses.
The fibers arising from the brainstem pedunculopontine
tegmental nucleus terminate in the caudate nucleus, putamen, pallidum, and subthalamic nucleus. These inhibitory
fibers release serotonin at their termination. The pedunculopontine nucleus may function in the rhythm of movements.
Although the caudate nucleus and putamen receive inputs
from multiple sources such as the cerebral cortex, thalamus,
and brainstem, their output fibers are funneled only to the
pallidum and substantia nigra.
The caudate nucleus and the putamen give rise to the following efferent (output) fibers (Fig. 12.10; Table 12.6):
• striatopallidal fibers; and
• striatonigral fibers.
The striatopallidal fibers that terminate in the lateral segment of the globus pallidus liberate GABA and enkephalin,
whereas those fibers that terminate in the medial segment of
the globus pallidus release GABA and substance P.
The striatonigral fibers terminate in the pars reticulata of the
substantia nigra. These fibers release GABA, acetylcholine, or
substance P.
The medial and lateral segments of the globus pallidus
receive inputs from the same regions but their output projections differ.
As discussed above, the striatopallidal fibers arising from
the caudate nucleus and the putamen release GABA and
enkephalin or GABA and substance P, and form the principal
input to the globus pallidus.
The subthalamopallidal fibers arise from the subthalamic
nucleus, form the subthalamic fasciculus, and terminate
mainly in the medial segment of the globus pallidus. These
excitatory fibers release glutamate at their termination.
Even though the medial and lateral segments of the globus
pallidus share both morphological and neurochemical
characteristics, each gives rise to well-defined output fibers
(Fig. 12.12).
The lateral segment of the globus pallidus gives rise to:
• pallidosubthalamic fibers;
• pallidonigral fibers; and
• other fiber projections that terminate in the striatum,
reticular thalamic nucleus, and the medial segment of the
globus pallidus (Table 12.8).
The pallidosubthalamic fibers arise only from the lateral
segment of the globus pallidus. They join the subthalamic
fasciculus, which terminates in the subthalamic nucleus
and sends collateral branches to the pars reticulata of the substantia nigra. These fibers are inhibitory, and release GABA
at their terminals.
The pallidonigral fibers are inhibitory and release GABA at
their termination. In addition, the lateral segment of the
globus pallidus also relays signals to the reticular nucleus of
the thalamus, which assists in the integration of reciprocal
connections between the thalamus and the cortex.
The medial segment of the globus pallidus gives rise to:
• pallidothalamic fibers whose two components are the
ansa lenticularis and the lenticular fasciculus (Fig. 12.13);
• pallidotegmental fibers; and
• pallidohabenular fibers (Table 12.8).
The medial segment of the globus pallidus is the main output station of the corpus striatum.
The ventral part of the medial segment of the globus pallidus
gives rise to a group of the pallidothalamic fibers that course
ventromedially, and then rostrally, to form a loop, the ansa
lenticularis, on the medial aspect of the posterior limb of the
internal capsule. The ansa lenticularis then courses posteriorly, in the prerubral field (H field of Forel).
The dorsal part of the medial segment of the globus
pallidus gives rise to another group of pallidothalamic fibers
that course medially, traversing the posterior limb of the
internal capsule. Medial to the subthalamus, these fibers
assemble to form the lenticular fasciculus (H2 field of Forel).
The pallidothalamic fibers coursing in the lenticular fasciculus subsequently join the pallidothalamic fibers of the ansa
lenticularis, to form a prominent fiber bundle known as the
H1 field of Forel. This bundle proceeds medially and caudally
to the prerubral field (H field of Forel) rostral to the red
nucleus. The fibers then form a loop and course to the thalamus collectively as the thalamic fasciculus (H1 field of Forel).
The thalamic fasciculus terminates in the ventral anterior,
ventral lateral, medial dorsal, centromedian, and parafascicular nuclei of the thalamus. The thalamus in turn projects to
the primary motor cortex as well as to the supplementary
motor area and premotor cortex of the secondary motor
cortex, all of which contribute fibers to the corticonuclear,
corticospinal, and corticopontocerebellar tracts. The signals
arising from the basal ganglia that are relayed to the spinal
cord via the contralateral lateral corticospinal tracts are
involved in limb movements. Recall that the ventral anterior
and ventral lateral nuclei of the thalamus are considered to be
the “thalamic motor nuclei” since they receive signals related
to motor function and send signals to the motor areas of the
cortex.
Note that the output fibers arising from the basal ganglia
and the fibers arising from the cerebellum that are destined for
the ventral anterior and ventral lateral nuclei of the thalamus,
do not overlap at their terminations. They terminate in distinct areas of these thalamic nuclei.
The pallidotegmental fibers arise from the medial segment of
the globus pallidus and terminate in the PPN in the inferior
tegmentum of the mesencephalon. The PPN, a nucleus of the
reticular formation, is associated with the reticulospinal tract
cells, which terminate on lower motoneurons and affect
motor function.
The pallidohabenular fibers arise from the medial segment
of the globus pallidus, course in the ansa lenticularis and 
lenticular fasciculus in the H field of Forel, and then join the
stria medullaris to terminate in the lateral habenular nucleus.
The habenular nucleus, a component of the habenular
nuclear complex of the epithalamus, is associated with the
limbic system.
The four separate systems
of circuits (paths) of the basal
ganglia are arranged in parallel. Each circuit relays distinct input from various areas of the cerebral cortex to the
basal ganglia where information is integrated. The integrated
information is relayed to the thalamus and then to different
areas of the frontal cortex where the execution of motor activity is initiated.
Each circuit consists of “closed loop” and “open loop”
components. In the “closed loop” component, information
arising from a particular cortical area is relayed through the
circuit back to its initial cortical source. In the “open loop”
component, information (arising from cortical areas that have
a similar function as the initial cortical area of the closed
loop), is relayed to the cortical source of the closed loop.
Although in the previous paragraphs careful attention
was paid to maintain a difference between “circuits” and
“loops,” in reality these terms are used synonymously. The
four loops described below are really circuits, each with
closed loop and open loop components.
Each system of circuits consists of many distinct parallel
circuits, with each circuit having a specific function. One
circuit within a particular system may be associated with a
specific movement of the foot, whereas another circuit in the
same system may be associated with the same type of movement of the hand.
The following circuits (loops) have been identified: a
motor loop, an oculomotor loop, an association loop, and a
limbic loop.
Signals from the basal ganglia are relayed to the motor
cortical areas via the motor
loop where they influence
the upper motoneurons of the corticospinal, corticonuclear,
and other descending motor tracts, which in turn influence
the lower motoneurons of the brainstem and spinal cord, and
ultimately motor activity.
The motor areas, as well as various other cortical areas,
give rise to a massive number of corticostriate fibers, which
terminate in the caudate nucleus and putamen (Fig. 12.14).
In the closed loop, a stream of corticostriate fibers arising
from the supplementary motor cortex (Brodmann’s area 6)
project mostly to the putamen, the “sensory-motor area” of
the striatum as well as to the caudate nucleus. The putamen
projects to both the medial and lateral segments of the globus
pallidus and the pars reticulata of the substantia nigra, all
of which in turn project to the ventral lateral nucleus of the
thalamus. Thalamocortical fibers from the ventral lateral
nucleus of the thalamus project back to the supplementary
motor cortex, completing the loop.
In the open loop, corticostriate fibers arising from the
primary motor cortex (Brodmann’s area 4), the premotor
cortex (Brodmann’s area 6), and the somatosensory cortex
(Brodmann’s areas 3, 1, and 2) are channeled to the putamen.
From there the information continues through the motor
circuit to terminate in the supplementary motor cortex,
which is the origin of the closed loop.
In the sensory-motor loop, signals from the basal ganglia
are relayed to the motor cortical areas of the frontal lobe.
There they exert their influence by planning the sequence of
actions in order to execute learned motor activities. This
influence is exerted on the upper motoneurons, which in turn
influence (via the corticonuclear and corticospinal tracts) the
lower motoneurons of the brainstem and spinal cord, and
ultimately motor activity.
In the closed loop, corticostriate fibers arising from the
frontal eye field (Brodmann’s
area 8) of the cerebral cortex
project to the body of the caudate nucleus (Fig. 12.15). The
caudate nucleus projects to the medial segment of the globus
pallidus and the pars reticulata of the substantia nigra.
Pallidothalamic and nigrothalamic fibers project to the
ventral anterior and dorsomedial nuclei of the thalamus.
Thalamocortical fibers project back to the frontal eye field,
closing the loop.
In the open loop, corticostriate fibers arising from the prefrontal cortex (Brodmann’s areas 9 and 10) and the posterior
parietal cortex (Brodmann’s area 7) terminate in the body of
the caudate nucleus. The signals are relayed through the circuit to terminate in the frontal eye field, which is the origin of
the closed loop. The globus pallidus and the substantia nigra
also relay this information to the deep layers of the superior
colliculus.
The oculomotor loop has an important function in the
control of voluntary saccadic ocular movements.
In the association loop various association cortical areas
of all four lobes project
mainly to the ipsilateral head
of the caudate nucleus, which is the “association area” of the
striatum (Fig. 12.16).
In the closed loop, corticostriate fibers arising from the
prefrontal cortex (Brodmann’s areas 9 and 10), project to
the head of the caudate nucleus, which in turn projects to
the medial segment of the globus pallidus and to the pars
reticulata of the substantia nigra. They in turn project to the
ventral anterior and dorsomedial nuclei of the thalamus.
Thalamocortical fibers terminate in the prefrontal cortex,
closing the loop.
In the open loop, corticostriate fibers arising from the premotor cortex (Brodmann’s area 6) and the posterior parietal
motor area (Brodmann’s area 7) project to the head of the
caudate nucleus. The signals are relayed through the circuit
to the prefrontal cortex, the origin of the closed loop.
The association (cognitive) loop functions in the planning
of motor activity and determining the direction of movement.
In the closed loop, corticostriate fibers arising from
the anterior cingulate gyrus
(Brodmann’s area 24) and
the orbitofrontal cortex
(Brodmann’s areas 10 and 11) project to the ventral striatum
(nucleus accumbens) and the head of the caudate nucleus
(Fig. 12.17). They, in turn, project to the ventral pallidum, the
medial segment of the globus pallidus, and the pars reticulata of the substantia nigra. Fibers arising from these areas
project to the ventral anterior and dorsomedial nuclei of the
thalamus. Thalamocortical fibers terminate in the anterior
cingulate gyrus and the orbitofrontal cortex, closing the
loop.
In the open loop, corticostriate fibers arising from the
medial and lateral temporal lobe, the hippocampus, the
amygdala, and the entorhinal area project to the ventral
striatum (nucleus accumbens) and to the head of the caudate
nucleus. The signals are relayed through the circuit to terminate in the anterior cingulate gyrus and the orbitofrontal
cortex, which is the origin of the closed loop.
The limbic loop functions in the emotional and motivational aspects of movement, manifested as various facial
expressions or other body movements.
Other circuits of the basal ganglia involve the substantia
nigra, subthalamic nucleus, and the pedunculopontine
nucleus (Table 12.9).
The two regions of the substantia nigra, the pars reticulata
and the pars compacta, both receive afferents (input) from:
• the striatum, via striatonigral fibers;
• the globus pallidus, via pallidonigral fibers; and
• the subthalamic nucleus.
The substantia nigra sends fibers to:
• the ventral lateral, ventral anterior, and medial dorsal
nuclei of the thalamus; and
• the striatum.
The former is via inhibitory GABAergic nigrothalamic
fibers arising from the pars reticulata—which also sends
collateral branches to the midbrain superior colliculus and
tegmental area. The latter sends inhibitory dopaminergic
nigrostriatal fibers arising from the pars compacta.
The subthalamic nucleus receives afferents (input) from:
• the lateral segment of the globus pallidus that provides
GABAergic fibers, the most prominent subcortical input
to the subthalamic nucleus;
• the motor cortex; and
• the pedunculopontine nucleus (PPN), whose fibers are
cholinergic.
In addition, a smaller number of input fibers arise from the
midbrain raphe nuclei (serotonergic) and the ventral median
nucleus of the thalamus (glutaminergic).
The subthalamic nucleus sends projections that terminate in
both the medial and lateral segments of the globus pallidus,
as well as in the pars reticulata of the substantia nigra, and in
the ventral pallidum. All of these fibers release glutamate and
are excitatory.
It is evident, based on the above projections, that the
globus pallidus and the subthalamic nucleus are interconnected via the subthalamic fasciculus. The subthalamic
nucleus modulates the output of the globus pallidus and the
substantia nigra, regions which contribute to the output of
the basal ganglia.
The pedunculopontine nucleus receives GABA-releasing
input fibers from the globus pallidus, and gives rise to
glutaminergic output fibers, which terminate in the globus
pallidus and the substantia nigra.
The neurons of the basal ganglia release the following neurotransmitters: glutamate, GABA, dopamine, acetylcholine,
and neuropeptides (Table 12.10).
Various regions of the cerebral cortex and the subthalamic nucleus give rise
to corticostriate and subthalamopallidal glutamate-releasing fibers, which project
to the striatum and the globus pallidus, respectively. The
glutamate-releasing neurons are excitatory to the GABAergic
and cholinergic neurons of the striatum (Fig. 12.18).
Gamma aminobutyric acid
(GABA)-releasing neurons
are inhibitory neurons. They
are the principal neurons of the striatum, thus making GABA
the principal neurotransmitter of the basal ganglia. Additionally, the globus pallidus and the pars reticulata of the
substantia nigra also house GABA-releasing neurons. The
fibers of these neurons form the striatopallidal, striatonigral,
pallidothalamic, and nigrothalamic pathways (Fig. 12.18).
Dopamine-releasing neurons are located in the pars
compacta of the substantia
nigra. Their axons form the
dopaminergic nigrostriatal
pathway, which terminates in the caudate nucleus and the
putamen. These axons have an inhibitory affect on these striatal GABAergic neurons that project to the lateral segment of
the globus pallidus. However, they have an excitatory affect on those striatal GABAergic neurons that project to the
medial segment of the globus pallidus and the pars reticulata
of the substantia nigra. These diametrically opposite effects
of dopamine at different terminations are due to differential
reactions of the dopamine receptors (Fig. 12.18).
Acetylcholine-releasing
neurons are inhibited by the
dopaminergic nigrostriatal
neurons, and in turn are
excitatory to the GABAergic output neurons of the striatum
(Fig. 12.19).
Neuropeptide-releasing neurons of the basal ganglia may
contain the following neurotransmitters: enkephalin, dynorphin, substance P, somatostatin, neurotensin, neuropeptide
Y, and cholecystokinin. These neurotransmitters are present
concurrently with other neurotransmitters in the same neuron (for example, both GABA and enkephalin are located in
the same neuron) (Fig. 12.19).
Widespread areas of the
cerebral cortex project (via
corticostriate fibers) to the
caudate nucleus, putamen,
and ventral striatum of the basal ganglia. Output signals
arising from the basal ganglia (i.e., in the pallidothalamic
and nigrothalamic fibers) are relayed to the thalamus. In turn
the thalamus projects to specific cortical areas of the frontal
cortex. The information flows between the basal ganglia and
the cerebral cortex via “direct loops” and “indirect loops,”
which are wiring patterns depicting the main circuits of the
basal ganglia (motor, oculomotor, association, and limbic
loops) discussed earlier. To demonstrate the direct loop and
indirect loop, the motor loop is used as an example.
The motor loop of the basal ganglia consists of two distinct
pathways that connect it to the cerebral cortex. Through these
two pathways signals from the input station, the putamen
(associated with motor activity), are transmitted to the output stations, the medial segment of the globus pallidus
(GPm) and the substantia nigra pars reticulata (SNr). One
pathway is referred to as the direct loop and the other is
referred to as the indirect loop. Although these pathways are
in parallel, one has an excitatory while the other has an
inhibitory influence on the cerebral cortex. It is via these pathways that the basal ganglia regulate the output of the motor
cortex and thus regulate motor activity indirectly.
In the direct loop (Fig. 12.20), corticostriate (glutaminergic, excitatory) fibers terminate in the striatum (mostly to the
putamen), where they excite a group of GABAergic inhibitory neurons (also containing substance P). These neurons
in turn send their fibers to the GPm and the SNr where they
have an inhibitory influence on the GABAergic inhibitory
pallidothalamic and nigrothalamic neurons, respectively.
The inhibition of the inhibitory projection neurons housed in
the GPm and the SNr results in disinhibition (excitation) of the
thalamocortical excitatory fibers to the cerebral cortex, and
ultimately stimulation of the motor cortex.
In the indirect loop (Fig. 12.21), corticostriate (glutaminergic, excitatory) fibers terminate in the striatum (mostly to the
putamen), where they stimulate another group of GABAergic
inhibitory neurons (also containing enkephalin). These
neurons in turn send their fibers to the GPl where they have
an inhibitory influence on the GABAergic inhibitory pallidosubthalamic neurons. The subthalamic nucleus houses
glutaminergic excitatory neurons that project to the GPm and
the SNr. The GPm and the SNr project GABAergic inhibitory
pallidothalamic and nigrothalamic fibers, respectively, to the
thalamus, which in turn projects glutaminergic excitatory
thalamocortical fibers to the cortex. Usually, the inhibitory
pallidosubthalamic neurons cause a reduction of the excitatory influence that the subthalamic nucleus has on the GPm
and the SNr. Enhanced stimulation of the indirect loop
results in disinhibition of the subthalamic nucleus, and thus
stimulation of the inhibitory GABAergic neurons in the
GPm and SNr. The GPm and SNr, via pallidothalamic and
nigrothalamic fibers, inhibit the thalamocortical neurons,
resulting in inhibition of the motor cortex.
The dopaminergic nigrostriatal pathway arises from
the substantia nigra pars
compacta and terminates in
the striatum. Dopaminergic 
fibers arising from the pars compacta of the substantia
nigra and the retrorubral nucleus form the nigrostriatal
pathway whose fibers terminate in the caudate nucleus or the
putamen, where they synapse with GABAergic neurons.
Dopamine is usually an inhibitory neurotransmitter; however, it has a different effect on different populations of
neurons housed in the putamen. It is believed that the
putamen contains neurons with up to five different types of
dopamine receptors, two of which are D1 and D2 receptors.
The dopaminergic neurons from the substantia nigra
pars compacta synapse with striatal GABAergic–substance P
neurons of the direct loop, which possess D1 receptors and
project directly from the putamen to the GPm and SNr.
These synapses have an excitatory effect on the direct loop
GABAergic–substance P neurons of the putamen, which terminate in the GPm and in the SNr.
The dopaminergic neurons from the retrorubral nucleus
synapse with striatal GABAergic–enkephalin neurons of
the indirect loop, which possess D2 receptors. These striatal
neurons project to the GPl which in turn projects to the
subthalamic nucleus, which then projects to the GPm. These
synapses with the striatal neurons with D2 receptors have
an inhibitory effect on the indirect loop GABAergic–
enkephalin neurons of the putamen.
The nigrostriatal pathway strengthens corticostriate fiber
input to the striatum concerning motor activity by stimulation of the direct loop and by inhibition of the indirect loop.
The cholinergic intrastriatal interneurons, however, counteract the cortical input on the dopaminergic neurons. These
cholinergic neurons stimulate the GABAergic–enkephalin
striatal output fibers of the indirect loop, which has an
inhibitory influence on the thalamocortical fibers. The net
effect of the basal ganglia is inhibitory.
The neurons that project directly to GPm possess D1
receptors, whereas those that project to the GPl and the pars
reticulata of the substantia nigra have D2 receptors.
The thalamostriatal fibers arise from the intralaminar
(centromedian and parafascicular) nuclei of the thalamus
and terminate primarily in the striatum, although some fibers
terminate in the globus pallidus and in the subthalamic
nucleus. The function of these fibers is unknown.
Hypertonicity is an abnormal increase of muscle tone in response to passive
stretch. Severe hypertonicity is referred to as rigidity. One of the normal functions of the basal ganglia, when stimulated, is to relay signals to the motor
cortex and brainstem, which ultimately inhibit muscle tone. Following a
lesion of the basal ganglia, this inhibitory influence is lost and symptoms of
hypertonicity are manifested contralateral to the side of the lesion.
Dyskinesias include unintentional, disorderly, purposeless movements. The disorders of the basal ganglia may be classified into hyperkinetic disorders or
hypokinetic disorders. Dyskinesias “occur at rest,” that is without volitional intent.
The symptoms of hyperkinetic disorders are characterized by abnormal involuntary movements, displayed by affected individuals as tremor, chorea,
athetosis, or ballism. Hyperkinetic disorders are caused by a disturbance of the
excitatory subthalamopallidal neurons of the indirect loop.
Tremoris a rhythmic, low amplitude movement that may be manifested as
rhythmic nodding of the head, or in the hands and feet.
Chorea (G. choros, “dance”) consists of a sequence of rapid, jerky, somewhat agile and flowing movements involving mainly the hands and feet, the
tongue, and facial muscles.
Athetosis (G. athetos, “not fixed”) is a condition in which the individual
displays slow, vermicular (“worm-like”) involuntary movements, which usually affect the hands and feet. This condition results following degeneration of
the lateral segment of the globus pallidus. Since the globus pallidus becomes
silent, the ventrolateral nucleus of the thalamus can send signals spontaneously to the motor cortex.
Ballismus (G. ballismos, “jumping about”) is the most extreme type of
dyskinesia.
Hemiballismus (G. hemi, “half;” ballismos, “jumping about” or “to
throw”) is a rare condition most often affecting older individuals, who exhibit
involuntary ballistic (violent striking) movements on only one side of the body,
that affect only the proximal muscles of a limb. It results following a cerebral
vascular lesion of the ganglial branch of the posterior cerebral artery, which
involves the contralateral subthalamic nucleus. The subthalamic nucleus functions in the integration of flowing movements produced by different parts of
the body. Normally, the subthalamic nucleus projects glutaminergic (excitatory) fibers to the two output nuclei of the basal ganglia, the GPm, and the SNr,
which in turn send inhibitory projections to the thalamus. Thalamocortical
fibers that are excitatory project to the motor cortex. Projections thus far are
ipsilateral, however the upper motoneurons arising from the cortex decussate
in the pyramids, thus affecting the opposite side of the body. A lesion in the
subthalamic nucleus would result in disinhibition of the thalamus, which in
turn becomes overactive, overstimulating the motor cortex which in turn
results in hyperkinetic symptoms in the opposite side of the body (Fig. 12.22).
Although hemiballismus may occur following destruction of the subthalamic
nucleus, it most often occurs following destruction of the striatal neurons
that normally inhibit the lateral segment of the globus pallidus, which in turn
exert an inhibitory influence on the subthalamic nucleus. Whatever the case
may be, the inhibitory effect exerted by the medial segment of the globus
pallidus on the thalamus is reduced, which in turn overstimulates the motor
areas of the cortex. In this condition, the thalamocortical pathway, arising
from the ventral lateral nucleus of the thalamus projecting to the supplementary motor area of the secondary motor cortex, is affected. Hemiballismus may
be alleviated either with chemical substances, such as dopamine-blocking
drugs or GABA-mimetic agents, or by surgical removal of the ventral lateral
nucleus of the thalamus. Hemiballismus usually disappears several weeks after
treatment.
Hyperkinetic disorders are caused by a disturbance of the excitatory
subthalamopallidal neurons of the indirect loop (Fig. 12.22). This creates
an imbalance between the direct loop (where pallidothalamic neurons are
stimulated) and the indirect loop (where pallidothalamic neurons are inhibited). This causes underinhibition of the thalamic neurons, which ultimately
results in excess cortical activity and movement.
Huntington’s disease is a rare, inherited, autosomal dominant genetic disorder, which is associated with a gene defect on chromosome 4. The symptoms
of Huntington’s disease become perceptible in the fourth or fifth decade of life
as a result of degeneration of the GABAergic, substance P, and cholinergicreleasing neurons housed in the striatum, and simultaneous degeneration of
the cerebral cortex (Fig. 12.23).
At its early stages, the neurons that degenerate are the striatal GABAergic
neurons that project to the lateral segment of the globus pallidus, but as the
disease progresses, eventually the entire striatal neuron population degenerates.
As a consequence of the loss of the GABAergic inhibitory influence, which
is normally exerted by the striatum via the striatonigral pathway on the
dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra (pars compacta, SNc), the
SNc dopaminergic nigrostriatal neurons become overactive. This results in
the dopaminergic nigrostriatal inhibitory pathway (over)inhibiting and thus
depressing the function of the striatum. This imbalance is responsible for the
abnormal movements displayed by affected individuals. The choreiform movements are reduced following treatment with antidopaminergic drugs. As a
result of the degeneration (atrophy) of the caudate nuclei that occupy the
lateral ventricles, radiographs reveal distended lateral ventricles resulting in
hydrocephalus ex vacuo.
In the early stages of Huntington’s disease, the cells affected are mainly
the GABAergic inhibitory neurons that project from the striatum to the lateral
segment of the globus pallidus (GPl). This results in a decrease of inhibitory
influence on the GPl. Since the GPl normally exerts a tonic inhibitory influence
on the subthalamic nucleus, this neural loss will result in an increase of the
tonic inhibitory influence exerted on the subthalamic nucleus by the globus
pallidus. The subthalamic nucleus normally sends excitatory projections to the
output stations of the basal ganglia, the GPm and the SNr. The output from the
(output stations of the) basal ganglia is normally inhibitory to the thalamus,
whose output in turn is excitatory to the motor cortex. This neural loss will
result in overinhibition of the subthalamic nucleus, which will in turn understimulate the GPm and the SNr. The output nuclei will relay reduced inhibitory
signals to the thalamus and brainstem terminations. Inhibition of an inhibitory
target results in what is referred to as disinhibition, which is really excitation.
Thus the thalamus and brainstem terminations are disinhibited following
the loss of the GABAergic neurons, which results in overstimulation of the
motor cortex, and ultimately of the lower motoneurons, producing involuntary
movements.
During the early stages of the disease, involuntary, choreiform movements
of the limbs and sudden movements of the face appear. As the disease progresses, additional muscles become affected, and the individual is incapable of
moving, speaking, or swallowing (Fig. 12.24). These symptoms are accompanied by advancing dementia and cognitive impairment due to degeneration
of the caudate nucleus and the cerebral cortex.
Sydenham’s chorea results from a bacterial infection. The infectious bacteria
contain antigens that are comparable to the protein receptors located in the
cell membrane of the neurons housed in the caudate nucleus and the putamen.
The individual infected by this bacterium produces antibodies that bind to the
bacterial antigens as well as to the receptors of the striatal neurons. These neurons act as if they were stimulated by neurotransmitter substances and fire,
resulting in choreiform movements, involving the face, trunk, and extremities.
This condition, however, is temporary and the child will recover completely.
In tardive dyskinesia, an affected individual displays repetitive movements
of the face, mouth, and tongue, as well as choreoathetotic movements of the
trunk and limbs.
The antipsychotic drugs (phenothiazines and butyrophenones) block the
transmission of dopamine in the brain. These drugs are aimed at the neurons
housed in the ventral tegmental area whose axons form the mesolimbic
dopaminergic pathway, but cause the dopamine receptors (D3 receptors) to
become hypersensitive. This results in an imbalance of the effect of the nigrostriatal pathway on the motor loop, causing abnormal movements. In recent
years newer antipsychotic drugs have become available that do not produce
such symptoms.
Hypokinetic disorders are characterized by bradykinesia (slowness of
execution of a movement) or akinesia. Akinesia is a disorder in which the
affected individual is unable to plan or to direct a movement toward a desired
position or target.
Hypokinetic disorders result from neuronal degeneration in the neostriatum, disrupting the direct loop of the basal ganglia. That is, the GABAergic
inhibitory neurons of the neostriatum, which normally send their fibers to the
medial segment of the globus pallidus, degenerate, eliminating their
inhibitory influence on the GABAergic inhibitory pallidothalamic neurons.
Consequently, this permits (frees) the tonically active pallidothalamic neurons
to continually (without restraint) overinhibit the thalamocortical excitatory
neurons whose fibers terminate in the cerebral cortex. In other words, the thalamus is not disinhibited. This paucity of thalamic input to the cerebral cortex
understimulates the corticospinal and corticonuclear tracts. The components
of the indirect pathway though are undisturbed, thus creating an imbalance
between the direct and indirect loops. The subthalamopallidal projections (of
the indirect loop) stimulate the pallidothalamic neurons that in turn overinhibit
the thalamus. Thus the insufficient thalamic disinhibition (excitation) via the
direct loop is augmented by the overinhibition of the thalamus via the indirect
loop, diminishing normal cortical activity, and increasing abnormal cortical
activity. This discrepancy in the funneling of input to the cerebral cortex via the
direct and indirect loops ultimately causes an increase in the stimulation of
antagonist muscles, and not a decrease in muscular activity.
Parkinson’s disease is the most prevalent disorder associated with the basal
ganglia, affecting approximately 1% of individuals over the age of 50. It results
following degeneration of the dopaminergic neurons of the pars compacta
of the substantia nigra (Fig. 12.25). Due to the degeneration of these neurons, dopamine is not produced, thus there is a reduction of dopamine levels
in the caudate nucleus and the putamen, where the nigrostriatal neurons
terminate. Symptoms usually do not appear until about 80% of the dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra have degenerated. The reduction of
dopamine levels in the striatum results in an increase of acetylcholine release
by intrastriatal neurons, and ultimately in the increase of the inhibitory
influence exerted by the basal ganglia on the thalamus. An inhibited thalamus
understimulates the motor cortex and brainstem terminations, which result in
slowness, or loss of movement, characteristic of Parkinson’s disease.
Although individuals affected by this disease may have a resting tremor,
muscle rigidity, hypokinesia, bradykinesia, or impairment of postural reflexes,
not all symptoms are necessarily expressed in the same individual (Fig. 12.26).
These individuals have no paralysis. However, the akinesia gives one the
impression that an individual with Parkinson’s disease is paralyzed. The
akinesia and the tremor generated the term “paralysis agitans.”
Individuals with this disease have a resting tremor affecting the hands,
which is exhibited as a “pill-rolling tremor,” where the index finger rubs on the
thumb—in a manner similar to the way that pills were made many years ago.
Interestingly, this tremor, caused by the regular interchange in contraction of
the agonist and antagonist muscles, is not evident when the affected individual is asleep, during voluntary movement, or during general anesthesia. In
contrast, cerebellar tremor is expressed during movement (“intention tremor”),
and is absent at rest (see Chapter 13). Also present is muscular rigidity, which
results from widespread increased muscle tone. Rigidity worsens during the
advanced stages of Parkinson’s disease. If the rigidity is continuous during a
movement, it is referred to as “lead-pipe rigidity,” whereas if the rigidity is discontinuous resulting from intermittent muscle relaxations during a movement,
it is referred to as “cog-wheel rigidity.” Rigidity of all flexors results in the
affected individual having a stooped posture.
Parkinson’s disease is also characterized by hypokinesia (G. hypo, “few;”
kinesia, “movement”) and bradykinesia (G. brady, “slow”) in which the
affected individual has trouble in both initiating and executing voluntary
movements. These are exhibited by a blank, expressionless, mask-like face,
slow blinking, slurred speech, and lack of upper limb movements that usually
accompany walking. An affected individual has difficulty getting up from a
chair, walking, picking up objects, etc. A shuffling gait may also develop, in
which the individual takes short steps. These movements begin with great
effort, followed by an increase in speed, although it is difficult to stop a movement in progress. However, muscle strength and deep tendon reflexes are not
influenced by this disease.
In humans, melanin begins to appear in the substantia nigra around the
fourth or fifth year of childhood. Autopsy of the midbrain of individuals who
had Parkinson’s disease reveals an absence of melanin.
Since dopamine does not cross the blood–brain barrier, patients with
Parkinson’s disease are treated with dihydroxyphenylalanine (L-DOPA, which
can cross this barrier to restore the missing dopamine) along with dopamine
agonists, an L-DOPA uptake inhibitor (carbidopa), and monoamine oxidase
(MAO) inhibitors.
In addition to pharmacologic treatment, the signs and symptoms of
Parkinson’s disease have in recent years been alleviated by surgical procedures
that involve lesions of the thalamus (thalamotomy) or the medial segment of
the globus pallidus (pallidotomy). An alternative surgical procedure includes
stimulation electrodes aimed at target nuclei such as the thalamus, globus
pallidus, or the subthalamic nucleus.
Patients receiving pharmacologic or surgical treatment experience relief
from some of the symptoms associated with Parkinson’s disease; however, the
progression of the disease can not be halted.
Parkinson’s disease (a hypokinetic disorder) and Huntington’s disease (a
hyperkinetic disorder), are two severe disorders of the basal ganglia reflecting two opposite ends of basal ganglial dysfunction spectrum. If excessive LDOPA is administered to an individual with Parkinson’s disease, the individual
will manifest choreic movements. L-DOPA administered to a patient with
Huntington’s disease will intensify the choreic movements.
Wilson’s disease is seen in young adults (10–25 years of age), and results following degeneration mostly of the putamen and the globus pallidus, although
other structures such as the cerebral cortex, thalamus, red nucleus, and cerebellum may also be involved. Degeneration is characterized by the loss of
nerve cells and accumulation of protoplasmic astrocytes. Consequently, the
nerve tissue exhibits small spaces, giving it a spongy appearance. Lenticular
degeneration is usually accompanied by cirrhosis of the liver.
An individual with this disease manifests symptoms such as tremor, rigidity, and choreiform or athetotic movements, as well as speech disorders and a
loss of facial expression. The tremor manifested by an affected individual is not
tremor at rest, as that seen in other basal ganglial disease. The tremor here is
referred to as asterixis, characterized as a “wing-beating” tremor, manifested
following extension of the upper limbs. The tremor may affect the hands at the
wrist, or the entire upper limb.
Individuals affected by this disorder experience relief from symptoms following treatment, which includes decreasing the concentration of copper in
the body.
This patient has Huntington’s
disease, confirmed by genetic testing. This patient has typical symptoms of
Huntington’s disease. Chorea is the most
identifiable and specific characteristic,
but the most problematic and disabling
symptoms are psychiatric disturbances
and dementia.
Chorea is a Greek term for “dance.”
It is characteristic of lesions or pathology
in the basal ganglia, especially of the caudate nucleus and putamen. However, the
exact localization and pathophysiology
of chorea is uncertain. Many lesions
involving the caudate and putamen
do not produce choreiform or similar
movement disorders. Chorea may be
generalized, as in Huntington’s disease,
or unilateral, in which case it is called
hemichorea. The most common cause of
hemichorea is a stroke in the contralateral
basal ganglia, although it may be caused
by any lesion involving certain parts of
the contralateral basal ganglia. A number
of different conditions, genetic or
acquired, can produce chorea. Certain
medications such as levodopa, prescribed
for the treatment of Parkinson’s disease,
can produce choreiform movements if
excess dosages are taken.
Huntington’s disease is an
autosomal dominant neurodegenerative
disease. Therefore an affected parent
has a 50% chance of passing the disease
to his/her children. It affects the
caudate and putamen early and most
prominently, but other parts of the basal
ganglia and the cerebral cortex are also
affected. The disease often presents itself
when the affected individual is in his
thirties or forties. Usually by that time
the individual has had children already
and may have passed the gene to his
children. The abnormal gene is on
chromosome 4 and contains an expanded
trinucleotide sequence. This gene
produces the Huntingtin protein. The
normal function of this protein, and
how the mutated protein causes the
death of neurons, is unclear. Genetic
testing is available for this disease.
Huntington’s disease causes progressive
and relentless deterioration of mental
function, which leads to incapacity
and death 10–20 years after onset.
Chorea and psychosis can be treated
by antidopaminergic medication;
however, there is no effective treatment
for the progressive dementia.
A 72-year-old woman
developed sudden severe vertigo
about 5 hours prior to presentation in the
emergency room. The vertigo has persisted
and remained severe. She became
nauseated and vomited a few times. She
has not been able to walk, and cannot
even sit on the side of the bed without
falling over. There was initially some
double vision but this has since resolved.
She complains that her left arm is “weak”
and heavy. Her speech is mildly slurred.
She feels that she is being pulled to the left
when she attempts to stand or sit up.
Exam shows mild dysarthria (slurred
speech), but language function is normal.
Bilateral end gaze nystagmus is present,
which is much more prominent toward
the left. Facial strength and sensation is
normal. Despite the patient’s complaint,
exam shows strength throughout to be
normal. However, there is dysmetria
and ataxia involving the left arm, but the
right arm is normal. The patient cannot
stand or even sit up in bed on her own.
Sensation is normal throughout. Head CT
in the emergency room was normal.
Movement is produced by complex interactions of the basal
ganglia, the cerebellum, and the cerebral cortex (Table 13.1).
The basal ganglia initiate motor activity and modulate cortical
output related to motor function, the cerebellum functions in
the coordination of movement, whereas the cerebral cortex is
involved in the planning and execution of voluntary movement. The cerebellum and basal ganglia exert their influence
on the brainstem and spinal cord and ultimately on motor
activity at the subconscious level, indirectly, by regulating the
output of the primary motor cortex and premotor areas of
the secondary motor cortex. The motor cortex influences the
execution of motor activity via direct projections to the brainstem nuclei (i.e., cranial nerve motor nuclei, nuclei of the
reticular formation, midbrain tectum, and red nucleus) and
spinal cord motoneurons.
Input from the motor cortex, and the visual, auditory,
vestibular, and somatosensory systems is funneled into the
cerebellum where it is integrated, and then utilized to plan
and coordinate motor activity; that is, the cerebellum plays
a key function in the execution of a motor task as it relates
to the timing, speed, direction, and precision of muscular
activity, whether of a single muscle or groups of muscles.
Additionally, the cerebellum receives information about
upcoming motor activity from the motor cortex, thus it is able
to monitor the commands arising from the motor cortex
that are relayed to the lower motoneurons of the brainstem
and spinal cord. This capability enables the cerebellum to
compare the impending movement with the movement in
progress. It also plays an active role in voluntary movement
by continuously adjusting the outflow of the motor and
premotor cortex, so that movement is modified to be precise,
smooth, flowing, and coordinated.
The cerebellum is the conductor behind a specific movement, since it not only determines its speed, but with the
aid of projections from the visual and other systems, it also
orchestrates its course. The cerebellum has important functions in proprioception, muscle tone, maintenance of
posture, balance (equilibrium), and coordination of skilled
voluntary movements, as well as in the learning and memory of motor tasks, such as playing a musical instrument and
riding a bicycle. All of these functions are performed at the
subconscious level.
The cerebellum (L., “little
brain”) is composed of two
cerebellar hemispheres and
the intervening vermis (L.,
“worm”), which is separated
from each hemisphere by
shallow longitudinally disposed furrows (Fig. 13.1). The surface of the cerebellum displays alternating, slender, parallel
elevations (ridges) known as folia and depressions (grooves)
known as sulci, that facilitate a great increase in the surface
area of the cerebellar cortex (Fig. 13.1C). The cerebellum is
connected to the dorsal aspect of the brainstem by three pairs
of prominent fiber bundles, the superior, middle, and inferior cerebellar peduncles (see Fig. 13.8). On its ventral surface, near the middle cerebellar peduncle, a small, bulb-like
region of each cerebellar hemisphere, known as the flocculus,
is connected to a region of the vermis known as the nodulus.
Like the cerebrum, the
cerebellum consists of gray
matter and white matter,
organized into an outer shell
of gray cortex, and a core of white matter containing deep
gray nuclei. The gray matteris distributed in two regions, as the
three-layered outer cerebellar cortex and the deep cerebellar
nuclei (cerebellar nuclei) (Figs 13.2), which are embedded
within the white matter. The greater part of the cerebellum is
composed of white matter, also referred to as the medullary
center or medullary white matter, consisting of myelinated
axons and neuroglia. There are three categories of these axons
(fibers): intrinsic, afferent, and efferent (Fig. 13.3).
1 The intrinsic (local, association) fibers arise from the
Purkinje cells of the cerebellar cortex and terminate in
the deep cerebellar nuclei.
2 The afferent (input) fibers arise from extracerebellar
sources and terminate in the deep cerebellar nuclei
and/or the cortex.
3 The efferent (output) fibers principally originate in the
deep cerebellar nuclei (although some arise from the cortex) and exit the cerebellum.
When sectioned in the sagittal plane through the vermis
or cerebellar hemispheres, the gray and white matter of the
cerebellum are recognizable with the unaided eye. Due to
the presence of the deep sulci and the extensive folding of
the cerebellar surface, the arborization of the white matter
resembles the branching of a tree. Thus early neuroanatomists referred to this image as the arbor vitae (L., “tree of life”)
(Fig. 13.4).
As the cerebellum develops,
the cerebellar cortex undergoes considerable folding
resulting in the formation of
the cerebellar folia, sulci,
and fissures. The cerebellar cortex laminates the underlying
white matter of the cerebellum. Each folium consists of a
thin layer of gray matter containing nerve cell bodies, as well
as a white matter center, composed mostly of myelinated
axons and neuroglia. As a result of this folding, approximately 85% of the cerebellar cortex becomes buried (tucked),
lining the banks of the sulci and fissures of the cerebellum,
whereas the remaining cortex covers the exposed cerebellar
surface.
The cerebellar cortex is simpler than the cerebral cortex,
in that it is composed of only
three layers (as opposed to
six layers) (Table 13.2). The number of neurons of the cerebellar cortex far outnumber those of the much larger cerebral
hemispheres and the neuronal organization of the cerebellar
cortex, unlike that of the cerebrum, is homogeneous throughout the various regions of the cerebellum.
The cerebellar cortex consists of an outer molecular layer
that lies deep to the pia mater, a middle Purkinje cell layer,
and an inner granular layer that lies on the surface of the cerebellar white matter (Fig. 13.5). The cerebellar cortex contains
five distinct types of nerve cells: stellate cells, basket cells,
Purkinje cells, granule cells, and Golgi cells (inner stellate
cells).
Although the molecular layer houses stellate cells and
the basket cells, both of which are inhibitory interneurons, it
is mostly occupied by the dendrites of the Purkinje cells,
and the parallel fibers of the granule cells (see discussion
below).
The Purkinje cell layer, the intermediate layer of the cerebellar cortex, lies between the molecular and granular layers.
It is occupied by the cell bodies of Purkinje cells, which are
only found in the cerebellum.
The granular layer is the deepest and thickest layer of the
cerebellar cortex. It houses mostly granule cells and some
Golgi cells. In addition, this layer also contains synaptic complexes, known as cerebellar glomeruli.
The cerebellar cortex receives two special types of fibers:
climbing fibers and mossy fibers. Climbing fibers are the
axons of neurons whose cell bodies are located in the inferior
olivary nucleus. Mossy fibers include the majority of the
remaining afferents to the cerebellum that arise from widespread areas of the nervous system (see discussion below).
Deep to the cerebellar cortex is the cerebellar white matter,
which contains myelinated axons made up of afferent fibers,
efferent fibers, and intrinsic (local) fibers of the cerebellum.
The cerebellar cortex has
five distinct cell types (Fig.
13.5; Table 13.3). We will
begin with the cells of the deep (granular) layer and work up
through the Purkinje layer to the cells in the superficial
(molecular) layer. The interrelationships among them are discussed later in this chapter under “Functional organization of
the cerebellum” (see p. 236).
Granule cells are the most numerous cells of the cerebellar
cortex; in fact there are so many granule cells that their number exceeds the total neuron population of the cerebral cortex.
Although the cell bodies of granule cells (the smallest neuron
cell bodies of the nervous system) reside in the granular
layer, their axons continue into the molecular layer where
they bifurcate to form a T-shaped configuration. These are
known as parallel fibers because they are oriented parallel
not only to the cerebellar surface but also to the longitudinal axis of the folium in which they are embedded.
Within the molecular layer, these unmyelinated parallel
fibers course through the bushy dendrites of a series of
Purkinje cells, like telephone wires running through
branches of a series of trees. A single parallel fiber establishes
synapses with thousands of Purkinje cells, and any one
Purkinje cell receives synaptic contacts from thousands of
parallel fibers.
Each granule cell, via its parallel fibers, forms glutamatereleasing excitatory synapses with the dendrites of Purkinje
cells, as well as with stellate cells, basket cells, and Golgi cells.
Note that the granule cells are the only intrinsic excitatory nerve
cells of the cerebellar cortex.
The Golgi cells, also known as inner stellate cells, are
inhibitory interneurons; their cell bodies occupy the granular layer and their dendritic trees ramify in the molecular
layer of the cerebellar cortex. Golgi cells form gamma
aminobutyric acid (GABA)-releasing inhibitory synapses
with mossy fibers within the glomeruli. Glomeruli are synaptic complexes of Golgi cells and their terminals, mossy fibers,
and granule cell dendrites. They are located in the granular
layer of the cerebellar cortex. It should be recalled that parallel fibers of the granule cells as well as mossy and climbing
fibers to the cerebellum form excitatory synapses with the
Golgi cells.
Purkinje cells are multipolar neurons that have a large cell
body and an extensive dendritic tree; in fact, they are the
largest neurons of the central nervous system (CNS). Their
flask-shaped cell bodies are located in the single-layered
Purkinje cell layer, whereas their striking, flattened bushy
dendrites, reside and ramify in the molecular layer. The
Purkinje cell dendrites are aligned in a single plane (similar to
the fanned-out feathers of a peacock’s tail), and are arranged
perpendicular to the parallel fibers and the longitudinal axis
of the folium in which they are embedded. The axon of each
Purkinje cell courses through the granular layer to reach the
underlying white matter core of the cerebellum containing the deep cerebellar nuclei. These axons, which become
myelinated upon entering the white matter, terminate principally in the ipsilateral deep cerebellar nuclei, particularly the
dentate nucleus, where they establish GABAergic inhibitory
synapses. However, axons of some Purkinje cells (of the
flocculonodular lobe) go right past the deep cerebellar nuclei,
leave the cerebellum, and synapse in the vestibular nuclei.
This Purkinje cell projection to the vestibular nuclei is the only
extracerebellar projection from the cerebellar cortex. Via
these projections, the Purkinje cells regulate the activity of the
deep cerebellar nuclei and the vestibular nuclei.
Stellate (L. stella, “star,” “star-shaped”) cells are inhibitory
interneurons that occupy the molecular layer of the cerebellar cortex. The stellate cells are believed to form taurinereleasing inhibitory synapses with the dendrites of the
Purkinje cells. Recall that the parallel fibers of the granule
cells form excitatory synapses with the stellate cells.
Basket cells are inhibitory interneurons and occupy the
molecular layer of the cerebellar cortex. Within the molecular layer, axons of numerous basket cells form “basket-like”
configurations that cover the cell body of a Purkinje cell.
GABA is released at these synapses, inhibiting the Purkinje
cells from firing. Recall that parallel fibers of the granule cells
establish excitatory synapses with the basket cells.
Four pairs of deep cerebellar
nuclei, the fastigial nucleus,
dentate nucleus, emboliform nucleus, and globose
nucleus (the last two are
frequently referred to as the interposed nuclei), are embedded within the cerebellar white matter (see Fig. 13.2). Based
on the connections between the regions of the cortex and
the deep cerebellar nuclei, the cerebellum is divisible into
functional zones, namely the vermal (median), paravermal (intermediate), and hemispheric (lateral) zone (Fig. 13.6A).
These functional zones are composed of cortex, white matter,
and the associated deep cerebellar nucleus (or nuclei), as
listed in Table 13.4.
As the cerebellum increases
in size during development,
its cortex is compacted and
forms alternating folia and sulci. Three of these sulci are
especially deep and are known as the primary, horizontal,
and posterolateral fissures (Fig. 13.6B). These fissures permit
the horizontal division of the cerebellum into three lobes: the
anterior, posterior (also known as middle lobe), and flocculonodular lobes. The flocculonodular lobe is composed of the
right and left flocculi and the unpaired nodulus. The anterior
lobe is separated from the posterior lobe by the primary
fissure. The posterior lobe is divided into two regions by the
horizontal fissure and is separated from the flocculonodular
lobe by the posterolateral fissure.
Interestingly, these lobes also correspond to the
phylogenetic development of the cerebellum (Table 13.5).
The posterior lobe is phylogenetically the newest portion of
the cerebellum, and is therefore also known as the neocerebellum (G. neo, “new”). The oldest portion of the cerebellum
is the flocculonodular lobe, and is also referred to as the
archicerebellum (G. archi, “beginning”). The paleocerebellum (G. paleo, “ancient”) is intermediate in phylogenetic
development and corresponds to the anterior lobe.
The paired flocculi (L. flocculus, “tuft of wool”) and the
nodulus (of the vermis) together form a small lobe, the
flocculonodular lobe.
Since this lobe is associated via its connections to the
vestibular system, functionally it is referred to as the vestibulocerebellum (Fig. 13.6). The vestibulocerebellum is unique since it receives direct projections (first order neuron
fibers) from the vestibular division of the vestibulocochlear
nerve (CN VIII). Some of the second order neurons housed in
the vestibular nuclei also project to the vestibulocerebellum.
Note that all vestibular projections (first and second order
neuron fibers) to the vestibulocerebellum are ipsilateral. The
vestibulocerebellum (via its influence on the descending
vestibulospinal tracts) is associated with balance and posture
maintenance. Additionally due to its projections to, and the
influence it exerts on, the vestibular nuclei, it is also responsible for the coordination of head and eye movements.
The second part of the cerebellum to develop phylogenetically arose later in evolution and is known as the paleocerebellum. It is composed of the greater part of the vermis, the
paravermal zone (paravermis, intermediate hemisphere),
and most of the anterior lobe. This part of the cerebellum
developed in relation to, and therefore has reciprocal projections with, the brainstem and spinal cord, and is functionally
referred to as the spinocerebellum (see Fig. 13.6). Sensory
(proprioceptive and exteroceptive) input from the muscle
spindles and Golgi tendon organs of the limbs and trunk is
relayed to the spinocerebellum via the spinocerebellar tracts,
and from the head via the trigeminocerebellar fibers. These
tracts and fibers carry proprioceptive information to the cerebellum as a movement that is being performed advances
towards completion. This input is then processed by the
spinocerebellum, which makes adjustments if necessary. The
spinocerebellum controls posture and muscle tone. It also
executes and coordinates muscle activity of the trunk and
limbs (particularly of the hands and feet) during stereotyped
movements, such as walking. Stereotyped movements
consist of repetitive movements lacking variation. The
spinocerebellum is somatotopically organized; that is, the
vermis controls axial musculature (head and trunk), whereas
the paravermal hemisphere functions in the control of the
limb musculature (mainly the hands and feet) (Fig. 13.7). The
inferior portion of the vermis is associated with crude motor
coordination, whereas its superior portion is associated with
precise motor coordination.
The most prominent lobe of the cerebellum is the most recent
phylogenetically and is thus referred to as the neocerebellum. It consists of the cerebellar hemispheres but does not
include the paravermal zone. Since the neocerebellum has a
vast number of reciprocal connections with the cerebral cortex, it is functionally referred to as the cerebrocerebellum (or
pontocerebellum) (see Fig. 13.6). The cerebellar hemispheres
do not exhibit any perceptible anatomical landmark separating the paravermal cortex from the hemispheres. Due to the
influence it exerts on the motor cortex, the cerebrocerebellum
is associated with the planning, coordination, and execution
of rapid, fine, nonstereotyped (learned, skilled) movements
such as ice skating. Nonstereotyped movement is characterized as nonrepetitive, variable, and of diverse pattern.
The cerebellum is attached to the posterior aspect of the
brainstem by three pairs of prominent fiber bundles: the
superior, middle, and inferior cerebellar peduncles (L. ped,
“foot”) (Fig. 13.8; Table 13.6). These peduncles are major (and
the only) communication highways whereby afferent (input)
and efferent (output) fibers enter or exit the cerebellum.
The superior cerebellar
peduncle attaches the cerebellum to the caudal midbrain and the pons (Table
13.6). This peduncle consists predominantly of efferent pathways arising from the
cerebellar cortex and the deep cerebellar nuclei—especially
from the dentate, emboliform, and globose nuclei—with
some fibers arising from the fastigial nucleus. The efferent
pathways have four components:
• the dentorubrothalamic pathway;
• the interpositorubrothalamic pathway;
• the fastigiothalamic tract; and
• the fastigiovestibular tract.
The fibers of the first two pathways form a bundle of
axons known collectively as the brachium conjuctivum
(L. brachium, “arm;” conjuctivum, “joining”), which conveys
the principal cerebellar efferent (output) pathway.
The superior cerebellar peduncle also carries afferent
pathways to the cerebellum. The input pathways are:
• the anterior spinocerebellar tract, transmitting proprioceptive input from the lower limb and trunk;
• the tectocerebellar fibers, transmitting visual input from
the superior colliculus;
• the rubrocerebellar fibers, transmitting information from
the red nucleus;
• the trigeminocerebellar fibers, transmitting sensory information from the head; and
• the ceruleocerebellar fibers from the locus ceruleus that
regulate cerebellar activity.
The middle cerebellar
peduncle joins the cerebellum to the dorsal aspect
of the pons. The majority of
fibers arising from the pontine nuclei destined for the cerebellum are the pontocerebellar fibers (transverse fibers of
the pons) (Table 13.6). These fibers decussate and then pass
into the cerebellum via the contralateral middle cerebellar
peduncle, the largest of the cerebellar peduncles, which is
also known as the brachium pontis. This peduncle consists of
almost entirely of pontocerebellar fibers.
Since signals arising in the cerebral cortex are transmitted
via corticopontine fibers to the pontine nuclei, the corticopontine and the pontocerebellar fibers collectively form the
corticopontocerebellar pathway, which relays afferents to
the cerebrocerebellum (neocerebellum).
The inferior cerebellar
peduncle connects the cerebellum to the medulla. It
carries mostly afferent pathways to the cerebellum from
the spinal cord and brainstem (Table 13.6). This peduncle
consists of two divisions: the more prominent, laterally positioned, restiform body, and the slender, medially located,
juxtarestiform body.
The restiform body includes proprioceptive afferent
fibers from the spinal cord and brainstem to the cerebellum
carried in the following tracts or fibers:
• the dorsal spinocerebellar tract;
• the rostral spinocerebellar tract;
• the cuneocerebellar tract;
• the trigeminocerebellar fibers;
• the olivocerebellar fibers; and
• the reticulocerebellar fibers.
The first four tracts/fibers terminate in the spinocerebellum
(paleocerebellum), whereas the olivocerebellar fibers terminate throughout the cerebellar cortex, but mainly in the
neocerebellum. The reticulocerebellar fibers, emerging from
the nuclei of the pontine and medullary reticular formation,
terminate in the spinocerebellum and vestibulocerebellum.
The juxtarestiform body includes mostly afferent fibers
to the cerebellum, but also some efferent fibers from the
cerebellum. The afferent fibers arise from first order and
second order vestibular neurons and reach the vestibulocerebellum and the vermis of the spinocerebellum as
vestibulocerebellar fibers. The only efferent fibers that leave
the cerebellum via the juxtarestiform body are the cerebellovestibular (fastigiovestibular, fastigiobulbar) fibers and
the cerebelloreticular fibers.
As mentioned above, there
are four pairs of intracerebellar nuclei, collectively
known as the deep cerebellar nuclei. These are embedded
deep in the cerebellar medullary white matter, and from lateral to medial, they are the dentate nucleus, the emboliform
nucleus, the globose nucleus, and the fastigial nucleus.
Recall that the emboliform and globose nuclei are collectively
known as the interposed nuclei.
Each of the deep cerebellar nuclei (Table 13.7) receives
input from the collaterals of afferents destined for the corresponding region of the cerebellar cortex, permitting the deep
cerebellar nuclei to be informed of input as it is being relayed
to the cerebellar cortex. The fastigial nucleus also receives
vestibulocerebellar fibers, which include axons of first order
neurons of the vestibular nerve (CN VIII), as well as axons
of second order neurons from the vestibular nuclei. The
vestibulocerebellar fibers transmit sensory input directly
from the vestibular apparatus of the inner ear. These connections play a role in the maintenance of equilibrium.
Although the deep cerebellar nuclei project to different
parts of the brain, each one also has projections to the inferior
olivary nucleus (inferior olive) as well as to the brainstem
reticular formation. Furthermore, each deep cerebellar nucleus sends reciprocal projections to the same region of the
cerebellar cortex that projects to it. It should be understood
that although output from the cerebellum arises from the
cerebellar cortex and the deep cerebellar nuclei, the deep cerebellar nuclei are the main source of cerebellar output. The deep
cerebellar nuclei influence the descending motor pathways
and ultimately the motoneurons of the brainstem and spinal
cord (Fig. 13.9).
The dentate nucleus (L.
dens, “tooth,” “toothshaped”) is the largest, the
most laterally positioned, and the most conspicuous of the
deep cerebellar nuclei. It appears similar to the inferior olivary nucleus since it resembles a “collapsed bag.” It receives
input from the collaterals of pontocerebellar afferents and
the Purkinje cell terminals originating from the cerebrocerebellum (pontocerebellum) (Table 13.7).
The dentate nucleus gives rise to efferent fibers that join
the brachium conjuctivum, the major component of the
superior cerebellar peduncle. These efferent fibers, joined by
fibers from the interposed nuclei, decussate and project to
the contralateral ventral lateral (VL) nucleus of the thalamus. This thalamic projection is the major output of the
dentate nucleus. The VL nucleus gives rise to fibers that
ascend to terminate predominantly in the premotor cortex
and the primary motor cortex. One of the outputs of both the
premotor and primary motor cortices is the anterior corticospinal tract, which has an important function in the maintenance of muscle tone of the trunk and proximal (girdle)
muscles. Although the cerebellum receives afferents (input)
from both the motor and the sensory areas of the cerebral cortex
about intended motor activity via the corticopontocerebellar
pathway, the cerebellum projects via a relay in the thalamus
to the motor cortical areas, particularly of the primary motor
area, where it influences upcoming motor activity.
Additionally, a few fibers arising from the dentate nucleus
exit the cerebellum via the same route but project to the parvocellular division of the red nucleus, and the oculomotor
nucleus of the opposite side. The parvocellular division of
the red nucleus sends fibers to the ipsilateral inferior olivary
nucleus, which projects heavily to the cerebellum. The fibers
terminating in the oculomotor nucleus synapse with the
lower motoneurons that innervate the superior rectus
muscle. Since the dentate nucleus neurons, whose axons
teminate in the oculomotor nucleus, receive an input from
the vestibular primary fibers, they may serve as a connection
of a vestibulo-oculomotor pathway.
Together, the globose (L.,
“globe-shaped”) and emboliform (G. emballein, “to
insert”) nuclei are referred to as the interposed nuclei.
Afferents to these nuclei include: Purkinje cell terminals arising from the spinocerebellum (paravermal cortex), as well as
collaterals of input fibers arriving in the cerebellum by way of
the restiform body and via the anterior spinocerebellar tract
(Table 13.7).
Axons arising from the interposed nuclei join the
brachium conjuctivum, cross to the opposite side, and project
to the contralateral red nucleus. Other axons project to the
ipsilateral VL nucleus of the thalamus. The projection to the
red nucleus is the major output of the interposed nuclei.
The red nucleus gives rise to the rubrospinal tract, whereas
the VL nucleus projects to the premotor and primary motor
cortex, which give rise to the lateral corticospinal tract. Recall
that the rubrospinal and lateral corticospinal tracts together
form the descending lateral systems and are involved in the
control of the distal musculature of the upper and lower
limbs (see Chapter 11 for more detail).
The fastigial nucleus (L.
fastigius, “summit” since it
is located in the roof of the
fourth ventricle) receives Purkinje cell fibers arising from
the vestibulocerebellum, and first order afferent collaterals
arising from the vestibular apparatus and second order fibers
from the vestibular nuclei (Table 13.7).
The fastigial nucleus gives rise to efferent fibers that leave
the cerebellum via the juxtarestiform body of the inferior
cerebellar peduncle. These are the fastigiovestibular (cerebellovestibular) fibers and the fastigioreticular fibers.
The fastigiovestibular fibers terminate principally in the
lateral and inferior vestibular nuclei where they influence the
vestibulospinal tracts, bilaterally. The fastigioreticular fibers
terminate in the pontine and medullary reticular formation
where they influence the reticulospinal tracts bilaterally (but
mainly contralaterally). Recall that the vestibulospinal and
reticulospinal tracts (collectively referred to as the descending
medial systems) have an important function in balance and
posture maintenance as well as in the motor activity of the proximal limb (girdle) musculature (see Chapter 11 for more detail).
The afferent (input) fibers
to the cerebellum outnumber
the efferent (output) fibers
from the cerebellum by three
to one. Afferent fibers pass
primarily into the cerebellar
cortex and they do so mainly via the inferior and middle cerebellar peduncles, although a number of fibers may enter via
the superior cerebellar peduncle.
Afferent signals to the cerebellum arise from three main
sources (Fig. 13.10; Table 13.8).
1 The vestibular system (vestibular ganglion and nuclei),
which terminates in the vestibulocerebellum.
2 The spinal cord, which terminates in the spinocerebellum.
3 The cerebral cortex, mostly via the corticopontocerebellar
pathway but also via the corticoreticulocerebellar and the
cortico-olivocerebellar pathways, all of which terminate
in the cerebrocerebellum.
In addition to these main sources, the cerebellar cortex
also receives afferents from the hypothalamus, superior colliculi, ventral midbrain tegmentum, locus ceruleus, pontine
raphe nuclei, trigeminal nerve nuclei, cochlear nuclei, and the
deep cerebellar nuclei.
Afferents to the cerebellum arrive as:
• mossy fibers;
• climbing fibers;
• monoaminergic fibers; or
• other fibers.
Mossy fibers include most of
the afferents to the cerebellum which terminate in the
cerebellar cortex. They are excitatory, release glutamate,
and arise from the vestibular system, spinal cord, and cerebral cortex via the brainstem (Table 13.8). On their way to the
cerebellar cortex to influence the Purkinje cells, the mossy
fibers send collaterals to the deep cerebellar nuclei, where
they also form excitatory synapses.
Sensory information about changes in head position and
orientation of the head relative to gravity is transmitted from
the vestibular apparatus of the inner ear by the peripheral
processes of first order bipolar neurons whose cell bodies are
housed in the ipsilateral vestibular ganglion. The central
processes of these neurons form the root of the vestibular
division of the vestibulocochlear nerve (CN VIII), and enter
the brainstem. Most of these central processes terminate in
the vestibular nuclei to synapse with second order neurons.
However, a small number of these central processes join the
juxtarestiform body (part of the inferior cerebellar peduncle)
and terminate ipsilaterally as mossy fibers in the vestibulocerebellum.
Cell bodies of second order neurons housed in the vestibular nuclei give rise to fibers that form a larger pathway than
the fibers of the first order neurons. They also join the
juxtarestiform body to terminate bilaterally as mossy fibers in
the vestibulocerebellum.
The afferents from the vestibular system that terminate
in the vestibulocerebellum (flocculonodular lobe) also send
collaterals to the fastigial nucleus.
Input from the spinal cord to the cerebellum consists of:
the anterior (ventral) spinocerebellar tract, the posterior
(dorsal) spinocerebellar tract, the cuneocerebellar tract, and
the rostral spinocerebellar tract. All of these tracts relay proprioceptive information (from muscles, tendons, joints, and
skin) and terminate in the cortex of the spinocerebellum as
mossy fibers (see Chapter 10 for more detail).
The anterior (ventral) spinocerebellar tract relays proprioceptive information from the lower trunk and lower limb.
This tract ascends contralaterally in the spinal cord, and its
fibers enter the cerebellum via the superior cerebellar peduncle and terminate in the cortex of the vermis. It is interesting
to note that these fibers cross twice (once in the spinal cord,
and then again in the cerebellar white matter), so that they
terminate in the cerebellar hemisphere ipsilateral to the
origin of the information.
The posterior (dorsal) spinocerebellar tract relays proprioceptive input from the lower trunk and lower limb. This
tract ascends in the spinal cord ipsilaterally, and passes
through the inferior cerebellar peduncle to enter the cortex of
the vermis.
The cuneocerebellar tract (cuneatocerebellar tract) relays
information from the upper trunk and upper limb, and
passes through the inferior cerebellar peduncle to terminate
in the ipsilateral paravermal zone cortex of the anterior lobe
of the cerebellum.
The rostral spinocerebellar tract relays information
from the upper limb. It passes through the inferior cerebellar
peduncle to terminate in the cortex of the ipsilateral vermis.
The afferents from the spinal cord that terminate in the
spinocerebellum (anterior lobe) also send collaterals to the
globose and emboliform nuclei.
A striking characteristic of the spinocerebellar tracts is that
they relay signals to the cerebellum at a conduction velocity
unparalleled by any other tract of the CNS. These tracts owe
their rapid conduction velocity to their wide-diameter, heavily myelinated axons. This keeps the cerebellum continually
informed of the current position and movement of body
parts, and it enables it to make rapid adjustments of upcoming motor activity if necessary.
Signals arising from the cerebral cortex are transmitted to
the cerebellum via the corticopontocerebellar pathway and
the corticoreticulocerebellar pathway. These pathways terminate in the cerebrocerebellum (posterior lobe).
The primary motor cortex, the secondary motor cortex,
and the somatosensory cortex of each cerebral hemisphere
give rise to more than 20 million axons that descend in the
corona radiata, the internal capsule, and the cerebral peduncle to the pons and spinal cord. Approximately 1 million of
these axons form the corticospinal tracts. The other 19 million
axons are destined for the pontine nuclei (i.e., as corticopontine fibers of the corticopontocerebellar pathway), the reticular formation, and, via the corticonuclear (corticobulbar)
fibers, to the cranial nerve motor nuclei in the brainstem.
Most of the 19 million fibers arising from the cerebral cortex
are the corticopontine fibers, and as their name indicates,
they terminate ipsilaterally in the pontine nuclei. Fibers arising from the pontine nuclei, known as pontocerebellar
fibers, decussate (then referred to as the transverse fibers of
the pons as they decussate) and gather to form the middle
cerebellar peduncle to enter the cerebellum and terminate in
the cerebellar cortex as mossy fibers. The pontocerebellar
fibers form the largest mossy fiber input to the cerebellum.
The pontocerebellar fibers send collaterals to the dentate
nucleus and terminate throughout the cerebellar cortex—
with the exception of the flocculonodular lobe—in the following manner: (i) signals originating from the primary motor
cortex are relayed via the corticopontocerebellar pathway to
the vermal and paravermal zones of the cerebellum; and
(ii) signals originating from the premotor, somatosensory,
and association cortical areas are relayed via the corticopontocerebellar pathway to the hemispheric zone of the
cerebellum.
The corticopontocerebellar pathway is the largest pathway associated with the cerebellum as evidenced by the massive middle cerebellar peduncles connecting the pons to the
cerebellum. Based on information relayed to the somesthetic
cortex from muscle receptors, this pathway transmits signals
that keep the cerebellum informed about a movement in
progress. Additionally, based on commands of the primary
and secondary motor cortices relayed to the lower motoneurons of the brainstem and spinal cord, it also keeps the
cerebellum informed about upcoming movement. Thus these
signals enable the cerebellum to monitor and adjust motor
activity continuously, so that muscular movement is precise,
smooth, flowing, and coordinated.
Various regions of the cerebral cortex give rise to corticoreticular fibers that descend to synapse, mostly ipsilaterally, in
the nuclei of the pontine and medullary reticular formation.
Reticulocerebellar fibers pass via the ipsilateral inferior and
middle cerebellar peduncles into the vermis of the cerebellum to terminate as mossy fibers where they function in
feedback systems. Via this pathway, the cerebral cortex alerts
the cerebellum of the initiation of a movement. The cerebellum then monitors motor activity and makes any necessary
modifications.
The cerebral cortex, in addition to projecting to the pons
via corticopontine fibers
(part of the corticopontocerebellar pathway) and to the
reticular formation via corticoreticular fibers (part of the corticoreticulocerebellar pathway), as discussed above, also projects to the inferior olivary
nucleus via cortico-olivary fibers.
The fibers arising from the pons and the reticular formation destined for the cerebellum (pontocerebellar and reticulocerebellar fibers, respectively), are referred to as mossy
fibers when they reach the cerebellar cortex. In contrast, the
fibers arising from the inferior olivary nucleus (the olivocerebellar fibers) destined for the cerebellum, are referred to
as climbing fibers when they reach the cerebellar cortex (see
Table 13.8).
The cortico-olivocerebellar pathway originates from the
primary motor cortex, the secondary motor cortex, and the
somatosensory cortex and follows the same path to the brainstem as does the corticopontocerebellar pathway. The
cortico-olivary fibers, however, terminate bilaterally in the
inferior olivary nuclei. Input from the spinal cord, the red
nucleus (major input), the cerebral cortex (mainly the motor
cortex), and the deep cerebellar nuclei, is funneled into the
inferior olivary nucleus, which is a cerebellar relay nucleus.
The inferior olivary nucleus gives rise to a group of fibers
that are destined for the contralateral cerebellar cortex.
These are the olivocerebellar fibers, the sole efferents from
the inferior olivary nucleus, that, as mentioned above, terminate in the cerebellar cortex as climbing fibers. On their
way to the cerebellum, the olivocerebellar fibers decussate,
course through the inferior cerebellar peduncle, enter the
cerebellar white matter, send collaterals to the deep cerebellar nuclei, and “climb” to the cortical granular layer
where they form aspartate-releasing excitatory synapses
with granule cells and Golgi cells. The climbing fibers then
continue their course through the Purkinje cell layer, where
they terminate in the molecular layer as unmyelinated fibers
to form powerful aspartate-releasing excitatory synapses
with Purkinje cell dendrites. The inferior olivary nucleus is
believed to play an important instructing role when one learns
to perform a new motor skill.
The ventral midbrain
tegmentum gives rise to
dopaminergic fibers that
terminate in the interposed
and dentate nuclei as well as
in the cerebellar cortex. These
dopaminergic inhibitory fibers
function in the regulation of cerebellar activity (see Table 13.8).
The norepinephrine (noradrenergic) fibers arising from
the locus ceruleus pass into the cerebellum via the superior and middle cerebellar peduncles to terminate in the cerebellar cortex where they form inhibitory synapses with dendrites of Purkinje cells and granule cells. These noradrenergic
inhibitory fibers function in the regulation of cerebellar
activity.
The fibers arising from the pontine raphe nuclei pass into
the cerebellum via the middle cerebellar peduncle where
they release serotonin in the granular and molecular layers of
the cerebellar cortex. These fibers inhibit Purkinje cells, and
function to regulate cerebellar activity.
In addition to the above afferent projections, the cerebellum
also receives afferents from the following sources: (i) the
hypothalamus; (ii) the cochlear nuclei; (iii) the superior colliculi; and (iv) the trigeminal nerve nuclei (see Table 13.8).
The fibers arising from the hypothalamus release
histamine at their terminals distributed throughout the cerebellar cortex. These fibers function to coordinate somatic
and visceral motor responses.
The cochlear nuclei (which process auditory information)
as well as the superior colliculi (which process information
associated with the tracking of a moving object) relay sensory
input to the dorsal aspect of the vermis regarding the location
and shift in position of a sound or object.
The trigeminal nerve nuclei also send projections
(trigeminocerebellar fibers) relaying sensory input from
orofacial structures and the stretch receptors of the muscles
of mastication. These fibers pass into the cerebellum via the
inferior cerebellar peduncle where they terminate as mossy
fibers.
Efferent fibers from the
cerebellum arise from two
sources (see Fig. 13.9):
1 Purkinje cells, which constitute the ultimate integrating
terminal within the cerebellar cortex.
2 Cells of the deep cerebellar nuclei. These nuclei house
the nerve cells whose axons form the principal cerebellar output (see discussion below, pp. 235–6).
The Purkinje cell axons of
the cerebellar cortex have
two destinations. The only
extracerebellar destination
is as follows: the axons of the
Purkinje cells located in the
cortex of the vestibulocerebellum go past the deep cerebellar
nuclei, exit the cerebellum, to end in the vestibular nuclei. The
majority of Purkinje cell axons, though, terminate locally at
their main targets (destination)—the deep cerebellar nuclei.
The Purkinje cell axons always form inhibitory synapses.
It is important to note that Purkinje cell axons arising from
the cerebellar cortex of the vermis, paravermal zone, or the
hemispheric zone overlying the deep cerebellar nuclei project
to the corresponding deep cerebellar nucleus (see Fig. 13.10
and discussion below).
All of the Purkinje cells that project to the deep cerebellar
nuclei send collaterals to Golgi cells, as well as to other
Purkinje cells, basket cells, and stellate cells of the cerebellar
cortex.
Purkinje cell axons arising from the cortex of the flocculonodular lobe (vestibulocerebellum) form a small extracerebellar projection as they exit the cerebellum via the
juxtarestiform body to terminate in the vestibular nuclei (see
Fig. 13.10). Vestibulospinal tracts originate in the vestibular
nuclei and terminate on those motoneurons of the spinal cord
that control posture and balance.
Note that the flocculonodular lobe projects primarily
to the vestibular nuclei (which are located outside the
cerebellum) and sends only a few Purkinje cell fibers to the
fastigial nucleus.
Based on the projections of the cerebellum to the vestibular nuclei, and since both the deep cerebellar nuclei and the
vestibular nuclei receive excitatory afferent fibers from the inferior olivary nucleus in addition to receiving inhibitory afferent
fibers from Purkinje cells, the vestibular nuclei are considered
by some to be anatomically analogous to the deep cerebellar
nuclei. Thus, the vestibular and deep cerebellar nuclei share
two common sources of afferent fibers.
Purkinje cell axons arising from the cortex of the vermal zone
project to the ipsilateral fastigial nucleus (see Fig. 13.10). The
fastigial nucleus gives rise to fibers that exit the cerebellum
via the inferior cerebellar peduncle to terminate bilaterally
in the lateral vestibular nucleus and in the contralateral
brainstem reticular formation.
The vestibular nuclei give rise to the vestibulospinal
tracts, and the reticular nuclei give rise to the reticulospinal
tracts. Collectively these tracts form the medial descending
system, which terminates in the spinal cord and has an
important function in the maintenance of posture, balance,
and muscle tone of extensor muscles.
Recall that the cortex of the vermis receives an input
from the spinal cord. The fastigial nucleus also gives rise to a
small number of fibers that pass into the superior cerebellar
peduncles and ascend bilaterally to the VL nucleus of the
thalamus. The thalamus in turn projects to the premotor and
primary motor cortex. The neurons of the premotor and
primary motor cortices, whose axons form the anterior
corticospinal tract, control motor activity of the axial and
proximal limb (girdle) musculature.
The Purkinje cell axons arising from the cortex of the
paravermal zone project to the interposed nuclei (see
Fig. 13.10), which are associated with the execution and modification of movements. These nuclei in turn, project, via the
superior cerebellar peduncle, to the magnocellular component of the contralateral red nucleus. The red nucleus
gives rise to the rubrospinal tract that terminates in the spinal
cord contralaterally and functions in regulating motor activity by facilitating the muscle tone of the ipsilateral flexors.
The interposed nuclei also send some fibers, via the superior
cerebellar peduncle, to the VL nucleus of the thalamus,
which projects to the premotor and primary motor cortex.
One of the outputs of these cortices is the lateral corticospinal tract. The rubrospinal tract and the lateral corticospinal tract together form the lateral descending system,
which controls the motor activity of the distal musculature
of the limbs, especially the hands.
Purkinje cell axons arising from the cortex of the hemispheric zone of the cerebellum project to the dentate
nucleus, which is associated with the planning of movements
(see Fig. 13.10). Fibers arising from neurons of the dentate
nucleus form the dentorubrothalamic pathway. These fibers
exit the cerebellum by joining the superior cerebellar peduncle, decussate, and terminate to synapse in two places:
the parvocellular component of the red nucleus and the VL
nucleus of the thalamus (most fibers terminate here). This
projection to the VL nucleus of the thalamus is the principal efferent projection of the cerebellum. The majority of the fibers in
the superior cerebellar peduncle originate from the dentate
nucleus.
The parvocellular component of the red nucleus gives
rise to fibers that join the central tegmental tract to terminate
in the ipsilateral inferior olivary nucleus.
The VL nucleus of the thalamus gives rise to fibers
that ascend to terminate in the ipsilateral primary motor and
premotor cortex, which give rise to the lateral corticospinal
tract. Via its influence on the lateral corticospinal tract, the
cerebellum plays an important role in the planning phase,
initiation, timing, and precision of discrete movements,
specifically the reciprocal contractions of agonist and antagonist muscles of the limbs (especially of the hands).
As discussed above, the histologic organization of the
cerebellar cortex is identical throughout the cerebellum (see
Fig. 13.5). It contains Purkinje cells whose functions are
inhibitory, and four types of interneurons, three of which are
inhibitory—namely basket cells, stellate cells, and Golgi
cells—whereas the fourth type, the granule cells, are
excitatory.
Excitatory inputs to the
cerebellar cortex are derived
from both extrinsic fibers
and intrinsic fibers. The
extrinsic fibers are composed of climbing fibers and mossy
fibers. The intrinsic fibers are the axons of granule cells of
the granular cell layer of the cerebellar cortex. An additional
source of excitatory synapses are the deep cerebellar nuclei,
which send their axons into the cerebellar cortex as nucleocortical connections.
The inferior olivary nucleus gives rise to the olivocerebellar
fibers. On their way to the cerebellum they decussate, and
when they reach the cerebellar white matter they branch,
send excitatory collaterals to the deep cerebellar nuclei, and
proceed by “climbing” towards the granular layer of the cerebellar cortex as climbing fibers. There, a climbing fiber gives
rise to about 10 branches that extend into the molecular layer
of the cerebellar cortex where they synapse with Purkinje
cells. Each terminal of a climbing fiber forms 300–500 direct,
excitatory synaptic contacts with the dendrites of an individual Purkinje cell (see Fig. 13.5). Each individual Purkinje
cell receives synaptic contacts from only a single climbing
fiber. An impulse transmitted from a climbing fiber to the dendrites
of a Purkinje cell generates a prolonged, oscillatory-type, powerful
depolarization of that Purkinje cell.
Additionally, the climbing fibers also depolarize the
Golgi, stellate, and basket cells. These inhibitory interneurons
attenuate Purkinje cell activity, which has a more potent
effect on cerebellar cortical outflow than does the limited,
intense depolarization of a small population of Purkinje cells
that are depolarized directly by a climbing fiber.
Most of the afferents to the cerebellum consist of mossy fibers
(see Fig. 13.5). Mossy fibers relay information to the cerebellum from various sources: (i) the spinal cord; (ii) the vestibular ganglion and vestibular nuclei; (iii) the pontine nuclei; (iv)
the reticular nuclei; and (v) the trigeminal nuclei. Afferent
fibers enter the cerebellum by passing through all three cerebellar peduncles; they then course through the cerebellar
white matter where they branch, and prior to their termination in the cerebellar cortex, send excitatory collaterals to the
deep cerebellar nuclei. When they reach their destination
they terminate in synaptic complexes, known as glomeruli,
within the granular layer of the cerebellar cortex.
A glomerulus has the following components: a mossy
fiber, which establishes excitatory synapses with the dendrites
of a granule cell, and a Golgi cell and its terminals, which
form inhibitory synapses with granule cell dendrites. A
mossy fiber activates a granule cell within a glomerulus.
It takes a large number of simultaneously stimulated
mossy fibers to activate a granule cell. The axon of each granule cell bifurcates in the molecular layer to form parallel
fibers, which form excitatory synapses with the dendrites of
Purkinje cells, basket cells, stellate cells, and Golgi cells (all
of which are inhibitory).
A single parallel fiber synapses with thousands of
Purkinje cells in succession (as a single electrical wire can
pierce through and contact the branches of many trees in
succession). The dendritic tree of a single Purkinje cell is
traversed by thousands of parallel fibers, which establish
synapses with dendritic terminals (as multiple telephone
wires can pass among the branches of a single tree). Each parallel fiber establishes only a few synapses with each Purkinje
cell. Recall that, in contrast, a climbing fiber forms several
hundred direct synaptic contacts with a Purkinje cell.
Consequently as a result of the greater number of synaptic
contacts, the climbing fiber input exerts a stronger excitatory
influence on Purkinje cells than does the mossy fiber input.
Thus it takes a multitude of concurrently stimulated mossy
fibers to trigger a nerve impulse in a single Purkinje cell.
Interestingly, mossy fiber stimulation triggers recurring
Purkinje cell action potentials, rather than the single,
sustained, powerful depolarization generated by climbing
fibers.
It should therefore be noted that a Purkinje cell may be
stimulated either by: (i) a climbing fiber, directly, resulting in
a very specific output signal; or (ii) mossy fibers, indirectly,
via granule cell parallel fibers, resulting in a less specific but
tonic output signal.
Basket cells, stellate cells, and Golgi cells are all inhibitory.
The basket cells and the stellate cells form inhibitory synapses with the Purkinje cells. The Golgi cells are stimulated
by mossy fibers within the glomeruli and by the parallel
fibers that form synapses on their apical dendrites. The stimulated Golgi cells then respond by inhibiting the granule cells
back in the glomeruli; that is, they prevent further excitability
of the granule cells by upcoming excitatory impulses from
the mossy fibers.
Inhibitory inputs to the cells of the cerebellar cortex are
derived from Golgi cells, Purkinje cells, basket cells, and
stellate cells. All four types of cells are intrinsic modulator
cells and they all release GABA.
There is only a single output
from the cerebellar cortex—
the axons of the Purkinje
cells (inhibitory). These
cells transmit integrated information from the cerebellar cortex to the vestibular nuclei and to the deep cerebellar nuclei.
The neurons housed in the
deep cerebellar nuclei are
continually under excitatory
influences exerted on them by the collaterals of climbing
and mossy fibers and inhibitory influences exerted on them by
Purkinje cell axons. The effect that these excitatory and
inhibitory influences have on cerebellar input during motor
activity, however, is still uncertain.
These excitatory and inhibitory influences exerted on the
cells of the deep cerebellar nuclei are constantly balanced,
hence the intensity of the efferent signals from the cells of the
deep cerebellar nuclei remains the same during moderate
levels of prolonged excitation. However, during intense
motor activity (e.g., when running), the excitatory influence
is exerted on the cells of the deep cerebellar nuclei prior to the
inhibitory influence. Thus the deep cerebellar nuclei first
relay an excitatory output signal to the motor system in order
to adjust the motor activity in progress, and then relay an
inhibitory output signal to ultimately inhibit the motor activity. Thus, once a movement is initiated, the deep cerebellar
nuclear excitatory output modifies the motor activity and,
shortly thereafter, it is inhibited so as to prevent overshooting
(missing the mark) of the movement in progress. An increase
in the firing rate of the cells of the deep cerebellar nuclei
assures that the cerebellum provides an excitatory output
signal, whereas a decrease in the firing rate of these cells
provides an inhibitory output signal.
The mossy fibers form the
principal conduit of excitatory signals to the deep cerebellar nuclei by a direct
projection (mossy fibers →
cells of the deep cerebellar nuclei). The mossy fibers simultaneously form an alternate pathway, which also ultimately
projects to the deep cerebellar nuclei, but first relays in the
cerebellar cortex. The mossy fiber stimulates a granule cell
that, via its parallel fibers, stimulates Purkinje cells. The
Purkinje cells then project primarily to the deep cerebellar
nuclei, thus completing the alternate pathway of mossy fiber
output to the deep cerebellar nuclei. (Purkinje cells also
have a small extracerebellar projection to the vestibular
nuclei.)
Stellate cells, basket cells, and Golgi cells modulate
Purkinje cell excitation generated by both mossy fibers and
climbing fibers. Consequently, Purkinje cells have a strong
inhibitory influence on the cells of the deep cerebellar and
vestibular nuclei, modulating their output. It is the processing of the afferent input to the cerebellum, and its modulation
via Purkinje cells, that ultimately determines the smoothing
of movements in progress.
It is important to remember that the cerebellum processes
information derived from the ipsilateral side of the body, and
from the contralateral cerebral cortex.
It is well known that electrical stimulation of the cerebellum does not produce
any type of sensation or movement. This led early neuroanatomists to refer to
the cerebellum as a “silent area” of the brain. The cerebellum plays a role in
cognitive functions in part via its projections to the frontal lobe, and has an
important function in motor learning. It is clear that a lesion involving the cerebellum results in the abnormal execution of voluntary and involuntary motor
activities, motor learning, and other cognitive dysfunction. Now that its internal circuitry is better understood, it has helped us understand the source of
these effects.
Since the intrinsic circuitry of the cerebellar cortex is identical throughout
the cerebellum, it is difficult to correlate a function with a particular region of
the cerebellar cortex. Instead, it is the origin and destination of the afferent
and efferent fibers that facilitates functional identification in the cerebellum.
Although the cerebellum is subdivided into three functionally distinct
zones, each including cortex, white matter, and one or two deep cerebellar
nuclei, lesions are rarely confined to one zone only. Generally speaking, lesions
involving the deep cerebellar nuclei (the major source of cerebellar output) or
the superior cerebellar peduncles (which convey most of the cerebellar output
fibers) result in more serious symptoms than lesions that are confined to the
cerebellar cortical region. Furthermore, although the cerebellum is involved in
motor function, a lesion in the cerebellum results in abnormal execution of a
motor task and not deficits in motor function such as paralysis or paresis. A
lesion confined to one cerebellar hemisphere results in symptoms that appear
on the body on the same side as the lesion. The reason why this occurs is due
to the fact that the cerebellar efferent connections and the descending motor
pathways upon which the cerebellum exerts its influence are crossed.
Additionally, the main afferent pathways from the spinal cord to the cerebellum, namely the cuneocerebellar and posterior spinocerebellar tracts, are
ipsilateral.
The most common symptoms attributed to cerebellar malfunction are
hypotonia (decrease in muscle tone) and ataxia (G. atactos, “disorderly,”
“uncoordinated”).
Severe trauma to the cerebellum results in serious symptoms; however,
after a variable amount of time, full recovery may follow. It is believed that
other parts of the brain may “take over” and compensate for any cerebellar
deficits. Persistent conditions, however, such as the prolonged, slow growth
of a tumor, cause milder symptoms. In this case, the growing lesion and
the damage produced are accompanied by continuous compensation for the
cerebellar deficits.
Flocculonodular syndrome has been characterized by the inability to
maintain equilibrium—without an accompanying ataxia of the limbs, hypotonia, or tremor—and unsteady walking and swaying from side to side. The
individual may also experience nystagmus, presented by rhythmic oscillations
of the eyes. Since lesions involving the flocculonodular lobe may include
midline cerebellar components, the symptoms may be bilateral.
Following a lesion in the vermal or paravermal zones, standing is characterized by the feet positioned far apart, providing a compensatory broad base.
While walking, the individual is unable to “walk in tandem.” The affected individual also exhibits titubation, a condition characterized by a rhythmic tremor
(involuntary oscillation) of the trunk or head when sitting or standing, and postural changes of the head, in which the head may be held in a rotated position
or tilted towards one side. Due to the lesion’s midline proximity, the side
in which the head is rotated or tilted may not be a reflection of the side of
the lesion.
Cerebellar disease may be manifested in various abnormal movements of
the eyes. The most conspicuous abnormal eye movement is spontaneous
nystagmus that occurs without stimulation of the vestibular apparatus.
Nystagmus is characterized by rhythmic oscillation of one or both eyes, and is
manifested when the eyes are deviated laterally in the horizontal plane
towards the side of the lesion.
A lesion involving the hemispheric zone may result in numerous disorders,
as described below. A lesion affecting one cerebellar hemisphere is exhibited
primarily as ataxia and tremor on the ipsilateral side of the body.
Ataxia (G. atactos, “disorderly”) is the lack of coordination of movements.
The timing and precision of motor tasks are impaired, resulting in awkward
movement.
Ocular movement disorders, of which the most common is nystagmus,
is most noticeable when the individual deviates his eyes towards the side of
the lesion. Ocular movement disorders result as a consequence of asynergic
(uncoordinated) activity of the extraocular muscles.
Tremor is characterized by the exhibition of static and kinetic tremors.
Intention tremor is manifested during a voluntary movement, and is
especially apparent towards the end of a movement, such as when putting
glasses on.
Delayed initiation and termination of motor activity. The affected
individual has difficulty initiating a motor activity, and once the activity is
ongoing, he then has difficulty stopping it.
Abnormal stance and gait is also seen in individuals with hemispheric
lesions. The individual stands with feet apart, and tends to sway forward,
backward, or to the side, resembling a state of intoxication. Ataxia may also be
evident when moving the lower limbs.
Decomposition of movement may occur following cerebellar disease.
Movements are jerky, awkward, and inaccurate. An individual with such a
lesion attempts to compensate for the awkward movements by making gradual movements such as moving one part (arm, forearm, hand, finger) of the
body at a time.
Hypotonia (diminished muscle tone) may be exhibited following manipulation of the limbs at a joint. A decrease occurs in resistance to this passive
manipulation, resulting in excess movement of the limbs referred to as “loose
jointed” or “rag-doll appearance,” since the damaged cerebellum does not
exert its influence on the stretch reflex. Hypotonia is velocity independent. This
condition gradually diminishes over time.
Dysarthria (G. dys, “abnormal,” “disorderly;” arthroun, “to utter distinctly”) is characterized by impaired speech that is slow and slurred. It is
caused from lack of coordination of the muscles used to produce speech and
is referred to as “scanning” speech, because of the excess and equal stress
on all syllables.
Dysmetria (G. dys, “abnormal,” “disorderly;” metron, “measure”) is a
disorder in which the individual is unable to estimate the distance between the
moving body part and a target (“past pointing”).
Dysdiadochokinesia (adiadochokinesia) (G. diadocho, “alternating;”
kinesis, “movement”) is the inability to carry out rapid alternating movements
regularly (example rapid pronation and supination of the forearm).
Dysrhythmokinesis is the inability to maintain rhythm while performing
alternating movements at a fast pace.
Impaired check and rebound is a condition which results from loss of
cerebellar input to the stretch reflex. When a limb is displaced from a certain
position against resistance (e.g., trying to straighten an individual’s flexed arm
against resistance), its abrupt release does not result in its return to its initial
position, but instead it is displaced beyond its previous position. The individual
is unable to stop a movement suddenly.
This patient had a left cerebellar stroke in the distribution of the
left posterior inferior cerebellar artery
(PICA). This is a common type of stroke
and is therefore important for all physicians to know about, not just neurologists.
The inferior and lateral cerebellum as well
as the dorsolateral medulla are supplied
by the PICA. However, many infarctions
involve only part of the PICA territory
and may involve only the cerebellum.
The PICA arises most commonly from the
vertebral artery just proximal to the basilar artery. Thrombosis of the PICA or the
vertebral artery or emboli to the vertebral
artery are the commonest causes of this
stroke syndrome.
The symptoms in the case above are
typical. The cerebellum, specifically the
cerebellar vermis and surrounding parts
of the inferior midline cerebellum, have
important connections with the vestibular
nuclei. Therefore, vertigo or dizziness is
common. Gait is often severely disturbed
and gait testing is critical. In fact,
sometimes it is the only abnormality
in cerebellar disease. Focal cerebellar
pathology causes ipsilateral ataxia or
dysmetria of the limbs, as opposed to the
contralateral dysfunction caused by most
other brain lesions. Ocular dysfunction is
common. Complaints of blurry or double
vision, nystagmus towards the side of the
lesion, ipsilateral gaze paresis, or other
ocular paresis are common. Additional
symptoms can occur with involvement of
the dorsolateral medulla, according to the
structures in that region of the brainstem.
An initial head CT is usually normal
unless there is some hemorrhage present.
After a day or two it will show the stroke.
MRI gives an exquisite view of the
cerebellum and brainstem.
Often the most distressing and
disabling symptom, along with the
inability to walk, is vertigo. This can be
relieved with antidopamine or similar
medication. Symptoms will usually
improve or resolve over time (days,
weeks, or months).
ith sudden onset of complete
left-sided paralysis and slurred speech.
The head CT in the ER demonstrated
evidence of early edematous changes
in the distribution of the right middle
cerebral artery (MCA). A head CT 2 days
later showed a very large right hemisphere infarction involving the entire
right MCA territory. He had been
somewhat drowsy but easily
aroused during the first few days of
hospitalization. He also had a right
gaze preference, left hemineglect, and
severe left hemiplegia. He became more
lethargic after the first few days, and then
could not be aroused. He was placed on
mechanical ventilation due to respiratory
difficulties.
Examination in the ICU revealed that
he was comatose (a sleep-like state from
which one cannot be aroused). His right
pupil was fixed and dilated. Other
brainstem reflexes were intact. There
was no movement elicited on the left side,
but there was some movement following
stimulation on the right. However, there
was a Babinski reflex (extensor plantar
response) present on the right (indicating
dysfunction of the descending motor tracts
controlling the right side of the body).
There was subsequent deterioration of
the patient’s condition. He eventually lost
all his brainstem reflexes (pupils became
unresponsive to light, eye blink to corneal
touch was lost, spontaneous respiratory
effort ceased, etc.). All limb movement
was lost. Brain death was confirmed.
The reticular formation (L. reticulum, “little net”) consists of
various distinct populations of cells embedded in an intricate
polysynaptic network of cell processes occupying the central
core of the brainstem. From an evolutionary perspective, the
reticular formation is phylogenetically an ancient neural complex that is closely associated with two other ancient neural
systems, the olfactory system which mediates the visceral
sense of smell, and the limbic system which functions in the
visceral and behavioral responses to emotions. The reticular
formation and the olfactory and limbic systems are interrelated as a result of their participation in visceral functions
and behavioral responses. The reticular formation is continually
informed of activity occurring in almost all areas of the
nervous system and responds by influencing the following:
skeletal muscle motor activity; somatic and visceral sensation; autonomic nervous system activity; endocrine functions; biological rhythms, via reciprocal connections to the
hypothalamus, and the level of consciousness.
The reticular formation is
most prominent in the brainstem, where it forms the
central core gray matter of
the midbrain, pons, and
medulla. The spinal cord also contains throughout its
entire length an analogue of the reticular formation, the
intermediate zone of gray matter. However, this intermediate zone of gray matter, consisting of interneurons, is not as
extensive as the brainstem reticular formation. The brainstem
reticular formation extends from the diencephalon almost as
far caudally as the pyramidal decussation.
The reticular formation contains fibers that are oriented
in all planes, thus in histologic sections it appears as an interlacing structure that fills the area among various ascending
and descending pathways, cranial nerve nuclei, and other gray
matter. Although it appears scattered, indistinct, and ambiguous, the reticular formation, in fact, consists of numerous different histologic subdivisions each having its own distinct
cytoarchitecture, specific connections, and functions.
The neurons of the reticular
formation possess elaborate
dendritic trees whose
branches radiate in all directions (Fig. 14.1). Some neurons give rise to an ascending or descending axon, with
numerous collateral branches. Other neurons give rise to a
primary axon, which bifurcates forming an ascending and a
descending branch, both of which then give rise to collateral
branches. The dendrites are oriented perpendicular to the
long axis of the brainstem. The elaborate radiating dendritic
trees, and the axons and their collaterals, facilitate the ability
of the neurons of the reticular formation to collect information from ascending and descending fibers arising from
various sources, as these fibers traverse the brainstem
tegmentum. Information converging on the reticular formation is integrated, and the reticular formation, via its output,
influences nerve cell activity at all levels of the central nervous system (CNS). As a result of its central location and
cytoarchitecture, a single neuron of the reticular formation
can exert its influence on various somatic or visceral functions via direct or indirect projections to higher brain centers,
local brainstem centers, and the spinal cord. Many neurons of
the reticular formation are involved in local multisynaptic
and reflex circuits.
Based on its connections (input and output), the reticular
formation can be thought of as the CNS “command center”
where surveillance of activities occurring in distant sites of
the CNS takes place. It is as a result of its diverse connections
that the reticular formation can integrate and modulate various activities and functions of almost all areas controlled by
the CNS.
More than 100 nuclei
scattered throughout the
tegmentum of the midbrain,
pons, and medulla have
been identified as being part
of the brainstem reticular
formation (Fig. 14.2).
Most of the nuclei of the reticular formation are not as
clearly defined as are other nuclei of the CNS. Although the
nuclei of the reticular formation have a number of diverse
functions, they are classified according to the following four
general functions:
1 The regulation of the level of consciousness, and ultimately cortical alertness.
2 The control of somatic motor movements.
3 The regulation of visceral motor or autonomic functions.
4 The control of sensory transmission.
The zones of the reticular
formation are: the unpaired
median zone, the paired paramedian zone, the paired
medial zone, and the paired
lateral zone (Table 14.1). Some authors consider the median
and paramedian zones to be one zone.
The unpaired midline raphe
(G. raphe, “seam”) nuclei
consist of intermediate-size
neurons. These nuclei are
present along much of the ventral aspect of the brainstem,
except in areas of the basis pontis and the medulla that are
occupied by various bundles of decussating fibers such as the
pyramidal and lemniscal decussations.
The raphe nuclei of the midbrain are the dorsal tegmental
nucleus and the nucleus raphes dorsalis (nucleus linearis);
those of the pons are the nucleus raphes magnus, the
nucleus raphes pontis, and the superior central nucleus; in
the medulla they are the nucleus raphes obscurus and the
nucleus raphes pallidus (Fig. 14.2).
Numerous neurons of the raphe nuclei synthesize serotonin. The serotonergic neurons that project to higher brain
centers are associated with sleep; those neurons that project
to the spinal trigeminal nucleus and the dorsal horn of the
spinal cord modulate or suppress the transmission of
nociception.
The paramedian zone,
located lateral to the midline,
receives primarily uncrossed
afferent (input) fibers from
the cerebral cortex, the fastigial and dentate nuclei of the
cerebellum, the vestibular
nuclei, and the spinal cord (Fig. 14.2). Efferent (output) fibers
from this zone project to the vermis, uvula, and fastigial
nucleus of the cerebellum. This nuclear group functions
in feedback systems associated with intricate patterns of
movement.
The medial zone also
referred to as the “motor,”
“efferent,” or “effector”
zone, consists of large-size
neurons. The nuclei of the
medial zone are the ventral
reticular (nucleus reticularis ventralis, central medullary
nucleus), gigantocellular reticular (nucleus reticularis
gigantocellularis), and the pontine reticular nuclei (nucleus
reticularis pontis oralis and nucleus reticularis pontis
caudalis) (Fig. 14.2).
These medial zone nuclei contain neurons whose axons
bifurcate to give rise to long ascending and descending
branches, each with collaterals. The ascending fibers of these
neurons course in the central tegmental tract to terminate in
the hypothalamus, which controls the autonomic nervous
system, and in the intralaminar nuclei of the thalamus, which
function in arousal. The descending fibers extend inferiorly to
the spinal cord by joining the pontine and medullary reticulospinal tracts. These fibers are involved in motor control of
the axial (trunk) and proximal limb musculature (shoulder,
hip, and proximal lower limb muscles).
In addition, the medial zone of the pontine reticular formation and the rostral medullary reticular formation also
give rise to the reticulobulbar tract, which terminates in the
motor and sensory cranial nerve nuclei, where they function
in motor control and modulation of the transmission of
sensory information.
Other fibers include the reticulocerebellar fibers, which
project from the medial zone to the cerebellum (with the
exception of those arising from the ventral reticular nucleus).
The medial zone of the caudal pons and the rostral
medullary reticular formation contains small, medium, and a
considerable number of very large neurons, and is called the
gigantocellular (magnocellular) reticular nucleus.
The lateral zone also
referred to as the “sensory”
or “afferent” zone, consists
of a group of nuclei containing small-size interneurons,
the most numerous type of
cells in the reticular formation. These small-sized interneurons have short ascending
and descending branches that project mainly locally to the
medial zone of the reticular formation. Other interneurons of
the lateral zone terminate in the brainstem cranial nerve
motor nuclei.
The lateral zone extends primarily into the pons and
medulla of the brainstem, and is continuous inferiorly with
the spinal cord intermediate zone of gray matter, which is
also heavily populated by interneurons. The intermediate
zone of gray matter should not be confused with the intermediolateral (lateral) horn of the spinal cord, which contains
the cell bodies of preganglionic neurons of the sympathetic
nervous system.
The nuclei of the lateral zone are the parvicellular nucleus,
which extends into the medulla and pons; the parabrachial
nucleus, which extends into the pons and mesencephalon;
the pedunculopontine nucleus, which is located in the rostral
pons and caudal midbrain; and the cuneiform nucleus, which
lies entirely in the mesencephalon.
The parvicellular nucleus (L. parvus, “small”) is located
medial to the spinal trigeminal nucleus and ventral to the
vestibular nuclei. It receives sensory information from the
cerebrum, cranial nerves, cerebellum, and the spinal cord
via collateral branches of various somatosensory pathways
relaying touch, pressure, pain, temperature, and general
proprioception. The lateral zone integrates the sensory
information and then relays it to the medial zone. Via the
reticulobulbar and descending reticulospinal tracts (all of
which arise from the medial zone), the reticular formation
functions in the modulation of sensory afferent input, and in
the maintenance of alertness.
The parabrachial nucleus is associated with visceral and
limbic functions. The pedunculopontine and the cuneiform
nuclei send fibers to brain centers such as the motor cortex,
caudate nucleus, putamen, globus pallidus (internal segment),
subthalamus, substantia nigra (pars compacta), and the cerebellum, all of which are associated with motor functions.
A number of brainstem nuclei are associated with, but are not
considered part of, the reticular formation. These nuclei are
the red nucleus, the inferior olivary nucleus, and the precerebellar reticular nuclei. In addition, the periaqueductal
gray matter of the midbrain also has extensive connections
with the reticular formation.
The precerebellar reticular
nuclei (see Fig. 14.2) consist
of the paramedian reticular
nucleus, the pontine reticulotegmental nucleus, and the lateral reticular nucleus. These
nuclei are functionally separate from the other reticular
nuclei, send fibers to the cerebellum, and function in the
coordination of muscle activity.
The periaqueductal gray
matter of the midbrain
receives afferent fibers from
the cerebral cortex, the
hypothalamus, the limbic
system, the parabrachial nucleus of the reticular formation,
the solitary nucleus, as well as from the ascending sensory
systems. Efferent fibers arising from the periaqueductal gray
matter project back to the above regions, as well as to the
medullary raphe nuclei. Based on its connections, and its
association with the reticular formation, it is believed that the
periaqueductal gray matter functions in the processing of
autonomic and limbic activities as well as the modulation
of nociception.
The reticular formation receives input via collateral
branches of the ascending and descending pathways from
widespread regions of the CNS. Input sources include the
somatosensory, visual, auditory, and vestibular systems, the
premotor and primary motor cortices, cranial nerve nuclei,
the diencephalon, basal ganglia, the cerebellum, and the
amygdala.
The reticular formation gives rise to output fibers that project
to the following areas of the CNS: widespread areas of the
cerebral cortex, the diencephalon, basal ganglia, the red
nucleus, the substantia nigra, the midbrain tectum, cranial
nerve motor nuclei, the cerebellum, nuclei of the autonomic
nervous system, and the spinal cord.
The reticular formation
receives a continuous flow
of somatosensory, auditory,
visual, and visceral sensory
information through these
vast connections and in turn exerts its influence by processing, controlling, and/or modulating the following:
• skeletal muscle motor activity, including muscle tone and
reflexes;
• somatic sensation;
• visceral sensation;
• autonomic nervous system activity;
• endocrine functions;
• biological rhythms, via reciprocal connections to the
hypothalamus; and
• level of consciousness.
Motor activity is controlled by fibers traveling within the
following fiber tracts: the corticoreticular fibers, pontine
reticulospinal tract, and medullary reticulospinal tract
(Table 14.2).
The corticoreticular fibers arise from the premotor cortex
and from the supplementary motor area of the secondary
motor cortex. In their descent to the brainstem, they accompany the corticonuclear and corticospinal tracts. The corticoreticular fibers terminate bilaterally in the medial zone of
the pontine and medullary reticular formation in the nuclei
that give rise to the reticulospinal tracts. In addition to receiving corticoreticular fibers from the motor cortex, the medial
zone of the pontine and medullary reticular formation also
receives fibers arising from other sources involved in motor
function such as the basal ganglia, red nucleus, and substantia nigra via the central tegmental tract. All of the above fibers
terminating in the medial zone of the pontine and medullary
reticular formation modulate the activity of the reticulobulbar and reticulospinal neurons.
The corticoreticular fibers, their nuclei of termination, and
the medial and lateral reticulospinal tracts are referred to as
the corticoreticulospinal pathway (system). The descending
fibers of the medial and lateral reticulospinal tracts synapse
primarily with spinal cord interneurons, which in turn
synapse with lower motoneurons, although some synapse
directly with lower motoneurons. The medial and lateral
reticulospinal tracts function in locomotion and postural
control.
The medial zone is the motor (efferent) zone of the pontine
reticular formation. This zone consists of the nucleus reticularis pontis oralis and nucleus reticularis pontis caudalis.
The medial zone of the pontine reticular formation gives rise
to the pontine (medial) reticulospinal tract (Fig. 14.3), which
descends in the ipsilateral anterior funiculus of the spinal
cord. This tract synapses with interneurons and gamma
motoneurons at all levels of the spinal cord stimulating the
extensors and inhibiting the flexors of the axial and proximal
limb musculature. Furthermore, many medial reticulospinal
tract fibers synapse with propriospinal interneurons that
function in reflexes involving multiple spinal cord segments.
These propriospinal interneurons synapse with lower
motoneurons that innervate the axial and proximal limb
musculature.
In addition, a few medial reticulospinal tract fibers
establish inhibitory synaptic contacts with the termination
of the central processes of those first order neurons whose
peripheral processes innervate muscle spindles, thus preventing the transmission of afferent input from those
muscle spindles. This mechanism has an inhibitory effect
on stretch reflexes, with resultant smoothing of voluntary
movement.
The medial zone of the rostral medullary reticular formation
(nucleus reticularis gigantocellularis and the nucleus reticularis ventralis) gives rise to the medullary (lateral) reticulospinal tract (Fig. 14.3). Similar to the medial reticulospinal
tract, this tract descends (primarily) in the ipsilateral anterolateral funiculus of the spinal cord. Nerve fibers of this tract
terminate at all spinal cord levels, where they synapse primarily with interneurons in the intermediate zone of gray
matter. The lateral reticulospinal tract fibers have an opposite
effect to that of the medial reticulospinal tract fibers, in that
they have an inhibitory effect on extensors and an excitatory
effect on flexors of the axial and proximal limb musculature.
Additionally, some fibers of the lateral reticulospinal tract
synapse with those lower motoneurons of the spinal cord that
supply motor innervation to the distal muscles of the upper
and lower limbs. These fibers exert primarily an inhibitory
influence on the lower motoneurons that innervate axial
extensor muscles, and a facilitatory influence on those lower
motoneurons that innervate limb flexors. Recall that the lateral corticospinal tract functions in the execution of fine,
skilled movements of the hands and feet (see Chapter 11 for
more detail).
Note that the descending fibers of the medial and lateral
reticulospinal tracts relay signals that arise from the areas
mentioned above (premotor cortex, supplementary motor
area, basal ganglia, red nucleus, substantia nigra, and cerebellum), as well as signals arising from other areas of the
reticular formation. All of these signals are integrated and
then influence the activity of the alpha and gamma motoneurons innervating skeletal muscle. Furthermore, these tracts
also control muscle tone and reflex activity. Since the reticular
formation functions in reciprocal inhibition, during contraction of flexor muscles there is simultaneous relaxation of
the antagonistic extensor muscles. The medial and lateral
reticulospinal tracts, with the contribution of the lateral
vestibulospinal tract, function in balance maintenance and
in making postural adjustments. Muscle tone, balance maintenance, and postural adjustments form a necessary background upon which voluntary movement is executed.
The nucleus reticularis pontis oralis, nucleus reticularis
pontis caudalis, and nucleus reticularis gigantocellularis
receive sensory information from the visual, auditory,
and vestibular systems, and function in head and eye
coordination.
The paramedian pontine reticular formation (PPRF)
(Fig. 14.4) of the medial zone of the pontine reticular formation is not a nucleus per se, but instead is a subset of neurons
of the nucleus reticularis pontis oralis and caudalis that
functions in mediating conjugate horizontal eye movements
elicited by head movements. It receives afferent fibers from
the frontal eye fields, the superior colliculus, and the vestibular nuclei, as well as from other regions of the reticular formation. Efferent fibers from the PPRF terminate mainly in the
abducens nucleus of the same side that innervates the ipsilateral lateral rectus muscle, and, via the medial longitudinal
fasciculus, to the contralateral oculomotor nucleus to synapse
specifically with the motoneurons that supply the contralateral medial rectus muscle.
The rostral interstitial nucleus of the medial longitudinal fasciculus located at the cranial end of the midbrain at
the level of the superior colliculus contains a collection of
nerve cells that function in controlling conjugate vertical eye
movements (Fig. 14.4A).
As a result of its location in
the brainstem, the reticular
formation is in a position to
exert its influence on ascending sensory and descending
motor pathways, as well as The fibers of the trigeminothalamic tract transmit nociceptive signals from visceral and somatic structures of the head,
whereas the spinothalamic and spinoreticular tracts transmit
nociceptive signals from visceral and somatic structures of
the body to their target thalamic nuclei. As these fibers
traverse the brainstem reticular formation on their way to the
thalamus, they give rise to collateral branches that terminate
in the lateral zone (the “sensory” or “afferent” zone) of
the reticular formation. These signals not only activate the
ascending reticular activating system (ARAS), which relays
information to the cerebral cortex alerting the individual, but
also relays information to the hypothalamus, the limbic system, the serotonergic raphe nucleus magnus, and the raphe
nucleus gigantocellularis of the medial zone of the reticular
formation. The hypothalamus and the limbic system function
in the manifestation of visceral and emotional/behavioral
responses to sensory stimuli (such as pain). The serotonergic
neurons of the raphe nuclei give rise to fibers that join the
reticulobulbar and the reticulospinal tracts to descend to
their target termination, the spinal trigeminal nucleus and
the dorsal horn of the spinal cord, respectively (Fig. 14.5). The
serotonin liberated by these descending fibers at their axon
terminals stimulates inhibitory enkephalinergic interneurons, each of which forms a presynaptic contact (axoaxonic
synapse) on the terminals of the central processes of the first
order nociceptive neurons. By this mechanism, the raphe
nuclei suppress or modulate the transmission of nociceptive
signals from the first order neurons to the second order
projection neurons that terminate in higher brain centers,
specifically the thalamus, where nociceptive signals reach
consciousness. For a more detailed description see Chapter 10.
Visceral information arrives at the reticular formation from
the cerebral cortex, hypothalamus, and limbic system. Sensory information from visceral structures that modulate the
cardiovascular and respiratory systems is transmitted to the
reticular formation via collateral branches derived from
the ascending sensory pathways and via the solitary tract,
which relays baroreceptor (from the carotid sinus, aortic
sinus), chemoreceptor (from the carotid body, aortic body),
volume receptor (from the heart atria), and stretch receptor
(from the lungs) information from the glossopharyngeal and
vagus nerves. The sensory information is processed in vasopressor and vasodepressor centers located in the reticular
formation, which are believed to be involved in the control
of vital functions such as respiration and the control of heart
rate. The response from these centers is conveyed via the
reticulobulbar and reticulospinal tracts, to the autonomic
nuclei of the brainstem and spinal cord.
The vasopressor center that corresponds to the rostral
ventrolateral medullary reticular formation and the parvicellular nucleus of the lateral zone nuclei, gives rise to fibers
that join the reticulospinal tract to descend to the spinal cord.
Here fibers synapse with preganglionic sympathetic neurons
of the intermediolateral column, which in turn synapse with
postganglionic sympathetic neurons that accelerate the heart
rate. Postganglionic sympathetic neurons also cause peripheral vasoconstriction, and thus increase blood pressure.
The vasodepressor center that corresponds to the caudal
ventromedial medullary reticular formation includes the
raphe nuclei and the gigantocellular reticular nucleus of the
medial zone nuclei. This center gives rise to fibers that join
the reticulobulbar tract to terminate in the dorsal motor
nucleus of the vagus. Here, fibers synapse with preganglionic
parasympathetic neurons, which in turn synapse with postganglionic parasympathetic neurons in the wall of the heart,
which decelerate the heart rate and lower blood pressure.
Stimulation of the gigantocellular nucleus of the brainstem reticular formation induces inspiration, whereas
stimulation of the parvicellular nucleus induces expiration.
The cardiovascular centers and the respiratory centers are
thought to be overlapping. In addition, the neurons of the
pontine parabrachial nucleus give rise to fibers that terminate
in the brainstem and spinal cord where they exert their
influence on the preganglionic parasympathetic neurons of
the vagus nerve, the preganglionic sympathetic neurons of
the intermediolateral column of the spinal cord, and the
lower motoneurons of the phrenic and intercostal nerves that
innervate the diaphragm and the intercostal muscles associated with breathing movements.
Interneurons located in the
lateral reticular formation
project locally to the nearby
cranial nerve nuclei. The
ventrolateral reticular formation contains neurons that
participate in the coordination of the visceral functions of the vagus nerve. The vagus
nerve innervates the gastrointestinal, respiratory, and cardiovascular systems, and via its connections with the reticular
formation plays a role in eliciting reflex responses associated
with swallowing, coughing, breathing, and changes in blood
pressure.
Interneurons of the lateral reticular formation are also
associated with the trigeminal, facial, and hypoglossal nerve
nuclei, which innervate structures of the mouth and face. The
motor control exerted by these cranial nerves on structures
they innervate in the orofacial region is coordinated by the
reticular formation. Although motor control of the muscles of
mastication—those of the tongue, lips, soft palate, and upper
pharynx—is under voluntary control, during chewing the
action of all of these structures is automated and is executed
without our being aware of it. The branches of the trigeminal
nerve transmit general proprioceptive information from the
temporomandibular joint, teeth, and muscles of mastication,
and general sensation information from the mouth (thermal
sensation and information about food consistency) to the
sensory nuclei of the trigeminal nerve. These nuclei in turn
project to the motor nuclei of the trigeminal and facial nerves
and to the reticular formation, which in turn coordinates
the movements of orofacial structures during chewing.
One of the most interesting associations of the reticular
formation is its participation in the control of the muscles of
facial expression during emotional responses. When an individual smiles while posing for a photograph, the imitation
smile is voluntarily produced by descending input from the
motor cortex (i.e., the corticonuclear tract) to the cranial nerve
motor nuclei (i.e., the facial motor nucleus). This is sometimes
referred to as a “pyramidal smile” (named after the pyramidal cells of the motor cortex forming the corticonuclear
tract). In contrast, a sincere, heartfelt “emotional” smile is
elicited by an alternate pathway, circumventing the primary
motor cortex. This pathway includes descending motor
input from accessory motor areas of the frontal lobe and the
basal ganglia that reaches the facial nerve motor nuclei via
relays in the reticular formation. This is often referred to
as the “Duchenne smile” after the French neurologist and
physiologist Duchenne de Boulogne who studied facial
expressions. Individuals who have suffered a stroke that
damaged the descending corticonuclear tract fibers, paralyzing the muscles of facial expression on one side of the face, are
unable to smile voluntarily. However, when they hear pleasant news, a genuine happy facial expression is elicited.
This may be hard to believe, but there is a neuroanatomical
basis for this phenomenon. Although voluntary control via
descending projections from the motor cortex to the lower
half of the facial motor nucleus is unilateral, activation of the
reticular formation by higher brain centers (i.e., accessory
motor areas and basal ganglia) that are involved in eliciting
emotional facial expressions, is bilateral.
The reticular formation also influences the activities of the
hypothalamus, modulating the formation or release of
hypothalamic releasing hormones (or release-inhibiting hormones), which in turn influence the activities of the pituitary
gland.
On their way to higher
brain centers, the ascending
sensory pathways (the trigeminothalamic, spinothalamic, and spinoreticular
tracts) relaying general and nociceptive sensation, give rise to
collateral branches that terminate in the parvicellular nucleus
of the lateral zone of the reticular formation. The lateral zone
gives rise to fibers that terminate in the medial zone of the
reticular formation. The medial zone then projects via the central tegmental tract to the hypothalamus and the intralaminar
nuclei of the thalamus. A spray of thalamocortical fibers
arising from the thalamus project to widespread areas of the
cerebral cortex. These fibers are referred to as the ascending
reticular activating system (ARAS), the arousal system that
functions in the sleep–wake cycle. Sensory information must
be continually funneled to the cerebral cortex in order to
maintain consciousness. Various levels of wakefulness are
contingent upon the level of reticular formation activation.
Waking up in the morning, remaining awake all day, and
falling asleep at night, are all functions of the brainstem reticular formation. It is interesting to note that without a continuous stream of sensory input from the ARAS portion of
the reticular formation to serve as an arousal system, which
in turn activates the cerebral cortex, the cerebral cortex alone
is unable to maintain consciousness and to function normally.
Planning our day, going about our normal daily activities,
and interacting with the stimuli in the environment are all
mediated by the cerebral cortex.
Pain signals that may awaken an individual from sleep
are relayed to the cortex via the ARAS. The ARAS stimulates
the hypothalamus and limbic system, which are involved
in visceral functions and the emotional and behavioral
responses to the painful stimulus.
Sensory stimuli (visual, auditory, olfactory, or somatic)
that startle or surprise an individual, such as a snake, siren,
strong odors, or unexpected contact with an unknown object,
activate the ARAS, and evoke an alerting response. We
usually awaken in the morning following the sudden sound
of an alarm clock, a loud noise coming from the street, or the
smell of coffee. The ARAS has to be adequately stimulated
in order to activate or “awaken” the cerebral cortex. On the
contrary, lack of or inadequate stimulation of this system,
can result in dozing off, as may occur when sitting in a dark,
quiet room.
It is interesting to note that whereas anesthetics block
the transmission of sensory signals that are relayed via the
ascending sensory pathways through the ARAS to the
cerebral cortex, they have no effect on the transmission of
auditory signals. This may explain a curious phenomenon
reported by patients that while they are under general anesthesia they are able to hear conversations by individuals in
the operating room.
Consciousness can be altered following head trauma, drug intoxication,
anesthesia, or metabolic disturbances. A lesion anywhere along the path of
the ARAS that affects the transmission of ARAS signals to the cerebral cortex,
can result in various disorders of consciousness.
Frequently, head trauma can result in increased intracranial pressure.
Since the brain is surrounded by the bony skull, intracranial pressure has
no outlet, and it compresses the soft brain tissue. An increase in intracranial
pressure may push the cerebellar tonsils toward the foramen magnum, which
will then apply pressure on or compress the medulla. This will damage the
respiratory centers in the medulla causing a central apnea (absence of
breathing).
The midbrain is quite vulnerable and lesions damaging the reticular
formation can cause hypersomnia associated with slow respiration. When the
midbrain is compressed, with consequent extensive damage of the ARAS pathways, a comatose state ensues.
An upper spinal cord lesion at T6 or above will damage the descending
hypothalamospinal and reticulospinal tracts that terminate in the sympathetic
intermediolateral horn of the spinal cord. Normally these tracts synapse with
the preganglionic sympathetic neurons residing in the intermediolateral horn,
and control autonomic activities. This type of lesion will at first cause a reduction in sympathetic activity such as a lowering of blood pressure, orthostatic
hypotension, and slowed heart rate. A gradual sympathetic reflex hyperactivity
appears in response to denervation hypersensitivity of the sympathetic
neurons. This is exhibited as sympathetic responses such as high blood pressure, sweating, piloerection, urinary retention, and a decrease in peripheral
blood flow.
This patient had a massive
stroke. The above scenario is a
typical progression indicative of brain
herniation secondary to progressive
edema from the stroke. The edema causes
swelling of the brain and since the skull
is rigid the swelling follows the route
of least resistance downward, and
consequently causes compression of other
structures. With severe edema there is a
shift of the midline structures of the brain
to the normal side, opposite the stroke
(midline shift), a downward shift of
the diencephalon and brainstem, and
herniation of the ipsilateral medial
temporal lobe through the tentorium
cerebelli into the posterior cranial fossa.
Impairment of consciousness occurs
with diffuse dysfunction of the cerebral
cortex (i.e., metabolic derangements),
diencephalic lesions, or upper brainstem
lesions. The latter two structures are the
locale of the ARAS, which is critical for
maintaining consciousness. Lesions
involving the ARAS result in coma. In
contrast, a focal brain lesion affecting only
part of the cerebral cortex and subcortical
white matter will cause no or minimal
impairment of consciousness. Advancing
lethargy with a focal brain lesion, such
as stroke or tumor, often indicates
progressive brain herniation leading
to brainstem function impairment
(assuming metabolic problems are ruled
out as the cause).
Other signs besides progressive
lethargy and coma are also important.
Stretching and compression of the
ipsilateral oculomotor nerve (CN III)
over the tentorial notch leads to ipsilateral
pupillary dilation and fixed pupil. Compression or ischemia of the contralateral
cerebral peduncle causes ipsilateral
weakness or pathologic reflexes (Babinski
sign). Other brainstem reflexes such as
the corneal blink reflex, oculovestibular
or oculocephalic reflexes, gag reflex, and
respiratory effort can be lost. Loss of all
brainstem reflexes indicates brain death.
A 70-year-old male has excruciating pain in the lower left part of
his face. This began 1 month ago. He
describes it as being like a jolt of lightning
that radiates from his left ear, down to his
jaw, and to the side of his mouth. These
jolts of pain occur numerous times each
day. Between attacks his face seems
normal. He denies any numbness or
tingling sensations. There is no hearing
abnormality. The pain is triggered by
talking, chewing, or touch of the lower
left part of his face. He is unable to eat or
brush his teeth, particularly on the left
side, since he fears triggering another
painful attack. He can only drink his
meals through a straw and cannot lie in
bed on his left side. He had the same
symptoms about 2 years ago. At that time
he was treated with a medication which
helped; symptoms subsided, but he
stopped taking the medicine. The pain is
so distressing that the patient admits to
contemplating suicide.
The general and neurologic exam is
normal, except that he withdraws and
will not let anyone touch the left side of
his face.
There are 12 pairs of cranial nerves emerging from the brain
and radiating from its surface (Fig. 15.1). They pass through
skull foramina, fissures, or canals to exit the cranial vault and
then distribute their innervation to their respective structures
in the head and neck. One of the cranial nerves, the vagus (L.,
“wanderer”) continues into the trunk where it innervates
various thoracic and abdominal organs.
In addition to being named, the cranial nerves are numbered sequentially with Roman numerals in the order in
which they arise from the brain, rostrally to caudally. The
following list includes their names and corresponding
numbers.
I Olfactory nerve.
II Optic nerve.
III Oculomotor nerve.
IV Trochlear nerve.
V Trigeminal nerve.
VI Abducent nerve.
VII Facial nerve.
VIII Vestibulocochlear nerve.
IX Glossopharyngeal nerve.
X Vagus nerve.
XI Spinal accessory nerve.
XII Hypoglossal nerve.
Although the cranial nerves and their sensory and
parasympathetic ganglia (Tables 15.1, 15.2) form part of the
peripheral nervous system, the optic nerve is really an outgrowth of the brain that emerges from the prosencephalon
(not the brainstem as other cranial nerves), and is therefore
not a typical cranial nerve. Moreover, part of the spinal
accessory nerve arises from the cervical spinal cord; thus
there are only nine pairs of cranial nerves that emerge from
the brainstem.
The main sensory and motor nuclei of the cranial nerves
are shown in Fig. 15.2.
In describing the various functional components (modalities) of the cranial nerves, the definition of the following
terms should be kept in mind: afferent is sensory input; efferent
is motor output that may be somatic to skeletal muscles or
visceral to smooth muscle, cardiac muscle, and glands, and
pecial visceral efferent to striated muscles derived from
the branchial arches; general refers to those components that
may be carried by cranial nerves as well as spinal nerves;
special refers to functional components that are carried by
cranial nerves only. The following categories describe the
functional components carried by the various cranial nerves
(Table 15.3).
1 General somatic afferent (GSA). These fibers carry general sensation (touch, pressure, pain, and temperature)
from cutaneous structures and mucous membranes of the
head, and general proprioception (GP) from somatic
structures such as muscles, tendons, and joints of the head
and neck. The trigeminal, facial, glossopharyngeal, and
vagus nerves transmit GSA input to the spinal nucleus of
the trigeminal nerve.
2 General somatic efferent (GSE). These fibers provide
general motor innervation to skeletal muscles derived
from embryonic somites. The oculomotor, trochlear, and
abducent nerves innervate the extraocular muscles that
control eye movements, whereas the hypoglossal nerve
supplies motor innervation to the muscles of the tongue,
mediating movement of the tongue.
3 General visceral afferent (GVA). General sensation from
the viscera is transmitted by the facial, glossopharyngeal,
and vagus nerves.
4 General visceral efferent (GVE). These fibers provide visceral motor (parasympathetic) innervation to the viscera.
The only cranial nerves that transmit parasympathetic
fibers are the oculomotor, facial, glossopharyngeal, and
vagus nerves.
5 Special somatic afferent (SSA). These fibers carry special
sensory input from the eye (retina), for vision, and from
the ear (vestibular apparatus for equilibrium, and cochlea
for hearing). The only nerves transmitting this component
are the optic and vestibulocochlear nerves.
6 Special visceral afferent (SVA). These are special sensory
fibers from the viscera. These fibers convey the special
sense of smell transmitted by the olfactory nerve and the
special sense of taste transmitted by the facial, glossopharyngeal, and vagus nerves.
7 Special visceral efferent (SVE). These motor fibers are
special because they supply motor innervation to skeletal
muscles of branchial arch origin. These fibers are carried
by the nerves of the branchial arches, which are the
trigeminal, facial, glossopharyngeal, and vagus nerves.
Table 15.4 summarizes the modalities, nuclei, ganglia, and
functions of the cranial nerves.
The bipolar olfactory receptor cells (first order
sensory neurons) of the
olfactory apparatus reside
not in a sensory ganglion,
but instead in the olfactory epithelium (neuroepithelium) of
the modified nasal mucosa lining the roof and adjacent upper
walls of the nasal cavities (see Fig. 19.1). The axons of these
bipolar neurons are SVA fibers transmitting olfactory sensation. These axons assemble to form bundles, the olfactory fila
(L., “threads”), which collectively form cranial nerve I. The
olfactory fila traverse the fenestrations of the cribriform plate
of the ethmoid bone to terminate in the olfactory bulb where
they synapse with second order relay neurons and interneurons (see Chapter 19).
The optic nerve mediates the
special sense of vision via its
SSA fibers. Light entering
the eye activates cells known
as rods and cones, the photoreceptors of the retina. Electrical
signals generated by the photoreceptors are transmitted to
other cells of the retina that process and integrate sensory
input. The first order sensory bipolar neurons of the visual
pathway reside in the retina and transmit electrical signals
of visual sensory input to the multipolar second order
ganglion cells of the retina. The ganglion cells give rise to
unmyelinated axons that converge at the optic disc and
traverse the lamina cribrosa, a sieve-like perforated area of
the sclera, to emerge from the back of the eyebulb. At this
point, the ganglion cell axons acquire a myelin sheath and
assemble to form the optic nerve. This nerve, an outgrowth of
the diencephalon, leaves the orbit via the optic canal to enter
the middle cranial fossa. There, the optic nerves of the right
and left sides join each other to form the optic chiasma (G.,
“optic crossing”) where partial decussation of the optic nerve
fibers of the two sides takes place. All ganglion cell axons
arising from the nasal half of the retina decussate(through the
central region of the chiasma) to the opposite optic tract. All
ganglion cell axons arising from the temporal half of the retina proceed (through the lateral aspect of the chiasma)
without decussating and join the optic tract of the same side.
The ganglion cell axons coursing in each optic tract curve
around the cerebral peduncle to terminate and relay visual
input in one of the following four regions of the brain: the lateral geniculate nucleus, a thalamic relay station for vision;
the superior colliculus, a mesencephalic relay station for
vision associated with somatic reflexes; the pretectal area, a
mesencephalic region associated with autonomic reflexes;
and the hypothalamus (see Figs 16.5, 16.7, 16.9).
The oculomotor nerve
supplies skeletal motor
(somatomotor) innervation
to the superior rectus, medial
rectus, inferior rectus, and
inferior oblique muscles
(which move the bulb of the
eye) and the levator palpebrae superioris muscle (which
elevates the upper eyelid). It also provides parasympathetic 
(visceromotor) innervation to the ciliary and sphincter pupillae muscles, two intrinsic smooth muscles of the eye.
The triangular-shaped oculomotor nuclear complex is
located in the mesencephalon. It is situated ventral to the
periaqueductal gray, adjacent to the midline at the level
of the superior colliculus. The oculomotor nucleus consists
of several subnuclei representing each of the extraocular
muscles. These subnuclei are composed of groups of nerve
cell bodies of the GSE neurons that innervate the listed
extraocular muscles and the levator palpebrae superioris
muscle. The cell group innervating the levator palpebrae
superioris is located in the midline, sending motor fibers to
this muscle bilaterally (both right and left upper eyelids). The
cell group innervating the superior rectus sends projections
to the opposite side; whereas the cell group innervating the
medial rectus, inferior oblique, and inferior rectus sends projections to the same side.
The Edinger–Westphal nucleus, a subnucleus of the
oculomotor nuclear complex is located dorsally, medially,
and rostral to the GSE nuclear complex. It contains the cell
bodies of GVE preganglionic parasympathetic neurons whose
axons join the GSE fibers as they converge and pass ventrally
in the midbrain to emerge from the ventral aspect of the brainstem in the interpeduncular fossa as the oculomotor nerve.
The oculomotor nerve proceeds anteriorly within the cranial vault, travels within the cavernous sinus, and by passing
through the superior orbital fissure, enters the ipsilateral
orbit. Within the orbit, the oculomotor nerve gives rise to
branches carrying the GSE fibers that innervate the levator
palpebrae superioris muscle and all but two of the extraocular muscles. The preganglionic parasympathetic fibers of the
oculomotor nerve terminate in the ciliary ganglion where
they synapse with postganglionic parasympathetic nerve cell
bodies. Postganglionic parasympathetic fibers exit the ganglion and reach the sphincter pupillae and ciliary muscles via
the short ciliary nerves to provide them with parasympathetic innervation. The parasympathetic fibers, when stimulated, cause contraction of the sphincter pupillae muscle,
which results in constriction of the pupil. Pupillary constriction reduces the amount of light that impinges on the retina.
Stimulation of the parasympathetic nervous system causes
pupillary constriction (whereas stimulation of the sympathetic nervous system, which innervates the dilator pupillae
muscle, causes pupillary dilation). Ciliary muscle contraction
releases the tension on the suspensory ligaments of the lens,
changing its thickness to become more convex. This accommodates the lens for near vision.
GSA pseudounipolar neurons, whose cell bodies reside
within the mesencephalic nucleus of the trigeminal nerve,
send their peripheral processes to terminate in the muscle
spindles of the extraocular muscles. These fibers travel via the
branches of the ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve.
GSA (GP) sensory input is transmitted from the muscle
spindles via the spindle afferents centrally to the trigeminal
nuclear complex, mediating coordinated and synchronized
eye movements by reflex and voluntary control of muscles.
nilateral damage to the oculomotor nerve results in deficits in the ipsilateral
eye. The following ipsilateral muscles will be paralyzed: the levator palpebrae
superioris, resulting in ptosis (G., “drooping”) of the upper eyelid; the superior
and inferior recti, resulting in an inability to move the eye vertically; and the
medial rectus, resulting in an inability to move the eye medially. The eye
deviates laterally (due to the unopposed lateral rectus), resulting in lateral
strabismus. This causes the eyes to become misaligned as one eye deviates
from the midline, resulting in horizontal diplopia (double vision). The inferior
oblique is also paralyzed. Since the innervation to the lateral rectus (CN VI)
and superior oblique (CN IV) muscles is intact and these two muscles are
functional, the eye ipsilateral to the lesion deviates inferiorly and laterally
(Fig. 15.3).
The sphincter pupillae muscle becomes nonfunctional due to interruption
of its parasympathetic innervation. The pupil ipsilateral to the lesion will
remain dilated (mydriasis) and does not respond (constrict) to a flash of light.
This may be the first clinical sign of intracranial pressure on the GVE fibers of
the oculomotor nerve. The ciliary muscle is also nonfunctional due to interruption of its parasympathetic innervation, and cannot accommodate the lens
for near vision (that is, cannot focus on near objects).
The trochlear nerve provides motor innervation to
only one of the extraocular
muscles of the eye, the
superior oblique muscle (a
common mnemonic is SO4).
The nerve cell bodies of GSE neurons reside in the
trochlear nucleus, which lies adjacent to the midline in the
tegmentum of the caudal midbrain. Fibers arising from this
nucleus initially descend for a short distance in the brainstem
and then course dorsally in the periaqueductal gray matter. The fibers decussate posteriorly and emerge from the
brainstem at the junction of the pons and midbrain, just
below the inferior colliculus.
The trochlear nerve is unique because it is the only cranial
nerve whose fibers originate totally from the contralateral
nucleus, it surfaces on the dorsal aspect of the brainstem, and
it is the smallest (thinnest) of the cranial nerves. As the
trochlear nerve emerges from the brainstem, it curves around
the cerebral peduncle and proceeds anteriorly within the
cavernous sinus to pass into the orbit via the superior orbital
fissure. Consequently, this cranial nerve has the longest
intracranial course and is highly susceptible to increased
intracranial pressure.
Damage to the trochlear nucleus results in paralysis or paresis of the contralateral superior oblique muscle, whereas damage to the trochlear nerve
results in the same deficits but in the ipsilateral muscle.
Normally, contraction of the superior oblique muscle causes the eye to
intort (rotate inward) accompanied by simultaneous depression (downward)
and lateral (outward) movement of the bulb of the eye. This is sometimes
referred to as the “Salvation Army muscle” (“down and out”). Intorsion of the
eyeball is the turning of the eyeball around its axis, so that the superior pole of
the eyeball turns inward. Imagine that extreme intorsion (which we really cannot do) will bring the superior pole of the eye facing the medial wall of the
orbit. When the superior oblique muscle is paralyzed, the ipsilateral eye will
extort (rotate outward) accompanied by simultaneous upward and outward
movement of the eye (Fig. 15.4B). This is caused by the unopposed inferior
oblique muscle and results in external strabismus.
Since the eyes become misaligned following such a lesion, an individual
with trochlear nerve palsy experiences vertical diplopia (double vision),
accompanied by weakness of downward movement of the eye, most notably
in an effort to adduct the eye (turn medially). The diplopia is most apparent
to the individual when descending stairs or while reading (looking down and
inward). To counteract the diplopia and to restore proper eye alignment, the
individual realizes that the diplopia is reduced as he tilts his head towards the
side of the unaffected eye (Fig. 15.4B). Normally, tilting of the head to one side
elicits a reflex rotation about the anteroposterior axis of the eyes in the opposite direction (Fig. 15.4A), so that the image of an object will remain fixed on
the retina. Tilting of the head toward the unaffected side causes the unaffected
eye to rotate inward and become aligned with the affected eye which is rotated
outward. Also, pointing the chin downward (“chin tuck”) rolls the normal eye
upward.
The trigeminal system consists of the trigeminal nerve,
ganglion, nuclei, tracts, and
central pathways. The
trigeminal sensory pathway,
which transmits touch, nociception, and thermal sensation, consists of a three neuron
sequence (first, second, and third order neurons) from the
periphery to the cerebral cortex respectively (Figs 15.5, 15.6).
The peripheral processes of the first order neurons radiating
from the trigeminal ganglion gather to form three separate
nerves, the three divisions of the trigeminal nerve whose
peripheral endings terminate in sensory receptors of the orofacial region. Their cell bodies are housed in the trigeminal
ganglion. The central processes of these neurons enter the
pons, join the spinal tract of the trigeminal, and terminate in
the trigeminal nuclei where they establish synaptic contacts
with second order neurons housed in these nuclei. The
trigeminal nuclei, with the exception of the mesencephalic
nucleus, contain second order neurons as well as interneurons. The second order neurons give rise to fibers that may or
may not decussate in the brainstem and join the ventral or
dorsal trigeminal lemnisci. These lemnisci ascend to relay
trigeminal sensory input to the ventral posterior medial
(VPM) nucleus of the thalamus, where they synapse with
third order neurons. The third order neurons then relay sensory information to the postcentral gyrus (somesthetic cortex) of the cerebral cortex for further processing.
The trigeminal nerve is the largest cranial nerve. It provides the major GSA innervation (touch, pressure, nociception, and thermal sense) to part of the scalp, most of the dura
mater, the conjuctiva and cornea of the eye, the face, nasal
cavities, paranasal sinuses, palate, temporomandibular joint,
lower jaw, oral cavity, and teeth. It also provides SVE (branchiomotor) innervation to the muscles of mastication (temporalis, masseter, medial pterygoid, lateral pterygoid), and
the mylohyoid, anterior belly of the digastric, tensor tympani,
and tensor veli palatini muscles.
The trigeminal nerve is the only cranial nerve whose sensory root enters and motor root exits at the ventrolateral
aspect of the pons (see Fig. 15.1). The larger, sensory root consists of the central processes (axons) of the pseudounipolar
sensory neurons of the trigeminal ganglion. These axons
enter the pons to terminate in the trigeminal sensory nuclear
complex of the brainstem. The motor root is smaller and consists of the axons of motor (branchiomotor) neurons exiting
the pons (Fig. 15.7). The motor root joins the sensory portion
of the mandibular division of the trigeminal nerve just outside the skull, to form the mandibular trunk. Before the motor
root joins it, the trigeminal nerve displays a swelling, the
trigeminal ganglion, which lies in a bony depression of the
petrous temporal bone on the floor of the middle cranial
fossa. Since this is a sensory ganglion there are no synapses
occurring here. As the peripheral processes of the pseudounipolar neurons exit the ganglion, they form three divisions (hence “trigeminal,” meaning the “three twins”). These
divisions traverse the foramina of the skull to exit the cranial
vault on their way to reach the structures they innervate. The
ophthalmic division is purely sensory and innervates the
upper part of the face; the maxillary division is also purely
sensory (although there may be some exceptions) and innervates the middle part of the face. The mandibular division is
mixed, that is it carries sensory innervation to the lower face
and branchiomotor innervation to the muscles listed above.
The trigeminal system includes four nuclei: one motor nucleus,
the motor nucleus of the trigeminal; and three sensory
nuclei, the main (chief, principal) sensory nucleus of the
trigeminal, the mesencephalic nucleus of the trigeminal, and
the spinal nucleus of the trigeminal (see Fig. 15.2; Table 15.5).
The motor nucleus of the trigeminal is located at the
midpontine levels, medial to the main sensory nucleus. It
contains interneurons and the cell bodies of multipolar alpha
and gamma motor (branchiomotor) neurons whose axons
form the motor root of the trigeminal nerve as they exit the
pons. The branchiomotor fibers join the mandibular division
of the trigeminal nerve and are distributed to the muscles of
mastication as well as to the mylohyoid, anterior belly of the
digastric, tensor tympani, and tensor veli palatini muscles.
The sensory nuclei consist of a long cylinder of cells, which
extends from the mesencephalon to the first few cervical
spinal cord levels. Two of these nuclei—the main sensory
nucleus and the spinal nucleus of the trigeminal—receive the
first order afferent terminals of pseudounipolar neurons
whose cell bodies are housed in the trigeminal ganglion.
These nuclei serve as the first sensory relay station of the
trigeminal system.
The main (chief, principal) sensory nucleus of the trigeminal nerve is located in the midpons. Based on its anatomical
and functional characteristics, it is homologous to the nucleus
gracilis and nucleus cuneatus. It is associated with the transmission of mechanoreceptor information for discriminatory
(fine) tactile and pressure sense.
The mesencephalic nucleus of the trigeminal is unique,
since it is a true “sensory ganglion” (and not a nucleus),
containing cells that are both structurally and functionally
ganglion cells. During development, neural crest cells are
believed to become embedded within the CNS, instead of
becoming part of the peripheral nervous system, as other
sensory ganglia. This nucleus houses the cell bodies of
sensory (first order) pseudounipolar neurons, thus there are
no synapses in the mesencephalic nucleus. The peripheral
large-diameter myelinated processes of these neurons convey GP input from the muscles innervated by the trigeminal
nerve and the extraocular muscles, as well as from the periodontal ligament of the teeth.
The spinal nucleus of the trigeminal is the largest nucleus
of the three nuclei. It extends from the midpontine region
to level C3 of the spinal cord, and is continuous inferiorly
with the dorsal-most laminae (substantia gelatinosa) of the
dorsal horn of the spinal cord. This nucleus consists of three
subnuclei: the rostral-most subnucleus oralis (pars oralis),
the caudal-most subnucleus caudalis (pars caudalis), and the
intermediate subnucleus interpolaris (pars interpolaris).
The subnucleus oralis merges with the main sensory
nucleus superiorly and extends to the pontomedullary
junction inferiorly. It is associated with the transmission of
discriminative (fine) tactile sense from the orofacial region.
The subnucleus interpolaris is also associated with the
transmission of tactile sense, as well as dental pain, whereas
the subnucleus caudalis is associated with the transmission
of nociception and thermal sensations from the head. The
subnucleus caudalis extends from the level of the obex
(medulla) to the C3 level of the spinal cord. It is the homologue of the substantia gelatinosa since their neurons
have similar cellular morphology, synaptic connections, and
functions. Since the subnucleus caudalis lies immediately
superior to the substantia gelatinosa of the cervical spinal
cord levels, it is also referred to as the “medullary dorsal
horn.”
The trigeminal nerve does not have any parasympathetic
nuclei in the CNS, or parasympathetic ganglia in the peripheral nervous system. However, it is anatomically associated
with the parasympathetic ganglia of other cranial nerves
(oculomotor, facial, and glossopharyngeal) and carries their
autonomic “hitchhikers” to their destination.
The spinal tract of the
trigeminal nerve consists of
ipsilateral first order afferent
fibers of sensory trigeminal
ganglion neurons and mediates tactile, thermal, and nociceptive sensibility from the
orofacial region to the spinal nucleus of the trigeminal. The
spinal tract of the trigeminal also carries first order sensory
axons of the facial, glossopharyngeal, and vagus nerves.
These nerves terminate in the spinal trigeminal nucleus, conveying GVA or GSA sensory input from their respective
areas of innervation to be processed by the trigeminal system.
The spinal tract descends lateral to the spinal nucleus of the
trigeminal, its fibers synapsing with neurons at various
levels along the extent of this nucleus. Inferiorly this tract
overlaps the dorsolateral fasciculus of Lissauer at upper
cervical spinal cord levels.
The ventral trigeminal lemniscus (ventral trigeminothalamic tract) consists of mainly crossed nerve fibers from the
main sensory and spinal nuclei of the trigeminal. This tract
relays mechanoreceptor input for discriminatory tactile and
pressure sense (from the main nucleus) as well as sharp, welllocalized pain and temperature and nondiscriminatory (crude)
touch sensation (from the spinal nucleus) to the contralateral
ventral posterior medial (VPM) nucleus of the thalamus.
The dorsal trigeminal lemniscus (dorsal trigeminothalamic tract) carries uncrossed nerve fibers from the main
sensory nucleus of the trigeminal, relaying discriminatory
tactile and pressure sense information to the ipsilateral VPM
nucleus of the thalamus.
The thalamus also receives indirect trigeminal nociceptive
(dull, aching pain) input via the reticular formation (reticulothalamic projections).
Nearly half of the sensory fibers in the trigeminal nerve are Aβ
myelinated discriminatory touch fibers. As the central processes of pseudounipolar (first order) neurons enter the pons,
they bifurcate into short ascending fibers, which synapse in
the main sensory nucleus, and long descending fibers, which
terminate and synapse mainly in the subnucleus oralis and
less frequently in the subnucleus interpolaris of the spinal
nucleus of the trigeminal. These fibers descend in the spinal
trigeminal tract to reach their target subnuclei. Some second
order fibers from the main sensory nucleus cross the midline
and join the ventral trigeminal lemniscus to ascend and terminate in the contralateral VPM nucleus of the thalamus.
Other second order fibers from the main sensory nucleus do
not cross. They form the dorsal trigeminal lemniscus, and
then ascend and terminate in the ipsilateral VPM nucleus of
the thalamus. Descending fibers terminating in the subnucleus oralis or interpolaris synapse with second order neurons
whose fibers cross the midline and ascend in the ventral
trigeminal lemniscus to the contralateral VPM nucleus of the
thalamus. The VPM nucleus of the thalamus houses third order
neurons that give rise to fibers relaying touch and pressure
information to the postcentral gyrus of the cerebral cortex.
The remaining half of the sensory fibers in the trigeminal
nerve are similar to the Aδ and C nociceptive and temperature fibers of the spinal nerves. As the central processes of
pseudounipolar neurons enter the pons, they descend in the
spinal tract of the trigeminal and most of them synapse in the
subnucleus caudalis of the spinal nucleus of the trigeminal.
Nociceptive sensory input relayed in the subnucleus caudalis
is modified, filtered, and integrated prior to its transmission
to higher brain centers.
Interneurons located in the subnucleus caudalis project
superiorly to the subnucleus oralis and interpolaris of the
spinal nucleus and to the main sensory nucleus of the trigeminal, where they modulate the synaptic activity and relay of
sensory input from all of these nuclei to higher brain centers.
Furthermore, interneurons residing in the subnucleus oralis
and interpolaris project to the subnucleus caudalis where
they may in turn modulate the neural activity there.
Most of the second order fibers from the subnucleus
caudalis cross the midline and join the contralateral ventral
trigeminal lemniscus, whereas others join the ipsilateral ventral trigeminal lemniscus. All the fibers ascend to the VPM
nucleus of the thalamus where they synapse with third order
neurons in that nucleus. The fibers of third order neurons
ascend in the posterior limb of the internal capsule to relay
somatosensory information from the trigeminal system to the
postcentral gyrus of the somatosensory cortex for further
processing.
Electrophysiological observations have indicated that
electrical stimulation of the midbrain periaqueductal gray
matter, the medullary raphe nuclei, or the reticular nuclei,
has an inhibitory effect on the nociceptive neurons of the
subnucleus caudalis.
Substance P, a peptide in the axon terminals of smalldiameter first order neurons, has been associated with the
transmission of nociceptive impulses. A large number of
substance P axon terminals have been located in the subnucleus caudalis. Opiate receptors have also been found in
the subnucleus caudalis, which can be blocked by opiate
antagonists. These findings indicate that there may be an
endogenous opiate analgesic system that could modulate
the transmission of nociceptive input from the subnucleus
caudalis to higher brain centers.
Branchiomotor neurons housed in the motor nucleus of the
trigeminal give rise to fibers which, upon exiting the pons,
form the motor root of the trigeminal nerve (see Fig. 15.7).
This short root joins the sensory fibers of the mandibular
division of the trigeminal nerve outside the skull. Motor fibers
are distributed peripherally via the motor branches of the
mandibular division, providing motor innervation to the
muscles of mastication (temporalis, masseter, medial pterygoid, lateral pterygoid) and the mylohyoid, anterior belly of
the digastric, tensor tympani, and tensor veli palatini muscles.
The peripheral processes of the pseudounipolar neurons
housed in the mesencephalic nucleus of the trigeminal
accompany the motor root of the trigeminal as they both exit
the pons. These peripheral processes follow: (i) the motor
branches of the mandibular division to the muscle spindles
of the muscles of mastication; (ii) the orbital branches of the
ophthalmic division to the muscle spindles of the extraocular muscles; and (iii) the dental branches of the maxillary
and mandibular divisions to the sensory receptors of the
periodontal ligament of the maxillary and mandibular
teeth, respectively. The central processes of the neurons
transmitting general proprioceptive input from all the
muscles and from the periodontal ligament synapse in
the main sensory nucleus and in the motor nucleus of the
trigeminal, as well as in the reticular formation to mediate
reflex responses.
The jaw jerk reflex is a monosynaptic, myotatic (G., “muscle
stretch”) reflex for the masseter and temporalis muscles. A
hammer gently tapped on the chin causes the intrafusal
muscle fibers within the muscle spindles of the (relaxed)
masseter and temporalis muscles to stretch, which stimulate
the sensory nerve fibers innervating them. The cell bodies of
these sensory pseudounipolar neurons are located in the
mesencephalic nucleus of the trigeminal (Fig. 15.8). Their
peripheral processes, which terminate in the muscle spindles
(and are carried by branches of the trigeminal mandibular
division), form the afferent limb of the reflex arc. The central
processes of these neurons synapse in the motor nucleus of
the trigeminal bilaterally, as well as in the main sensory
nucleus and the reticular formation. The efferent limb of this
reflex arc is formed by the motoneuron fibers traveling to
the masseter and temporalis muscles (bilaterally, via motor
branches of the trigeminal mandibular division) to cause
them to contract and compensate for the stretch.
Skull fractures may cause a unilateral lesion of the branchiomotor fibers to the
muscles of mastication, which will result in a flaccid paralysis or paresis with
subsequent muscle atrophy of the ipsilateral muscles of mastication. This
becomes apparent upon muscle palpation when the patient is asked to clench
his jaw. When depressing the lower jaw it deviates towards the affected side
(weak side) primarily due to the unopposed action of the lateral pterygoid
muscle of the unaffected side. This impairs chewing on the lesion side due to
muscle paralysis.
Damage to the fibers innervating the tensor tympani muscle results in
hyperacusis (acute sense of hearing) and impaired hearing on the ipsilateral side.
Damage to the GSA fibers of the mandibular division will result in loss of
sensation from the areas supplied by the branches of this division. Although
the trigeminal nerve has an extensive distribution in the head, there is minimal
overlapping of the areas innervated by its three divisions, especially in the central region of the face. Lesions in the peripheral branches of the trigeminal
nerve can be located by testing for sensory deficits in the areas that are innervated by each of the three trigeminal divisions. If a lesion is located distal to the
joining of the autonomic fibers that hitchhike with the trigeminal branches to
the lacrimal gland or the salivary glands, then both sensory and autonomic
innervation are interrupted.
Infection of the trigeminal ganglion by herpes zoster virus (known as shingles) causes a significant amount of pain as well as damage to the sensory
fibers of the three trigeminal divisions (the ophthalmic division is most commonly infected). This results in loss of sensation on the affected side. Damage
to the sensory fibers innervating the cornea (via the ophthalmic division)
results in a loss of the corneal reflex when the ipsilateral eye is stimulated
(afferent limb damage of the corneal reflex).
Trigeminal neuralgia (trigeminal nerve pain, tic douloureux)
A common clinical concern regarding the trigeminal nerve is trigeminal
neuralgia. This condition results from idiopathic etiology (unknown cause)
and is manifested as intense, sudden onset, and recurrent unilateral pain in the
distribution of one of the three divisions of the trigeminal nerve, most commonly the maxillary division. There may be a trigger zone in the distribution of
the affected trigeminal division, and if it is stimulated it may trigger an attack
that usually lasts for less than a minute. This condition may be treated pharmacologically or surgically. Surgical treatment includes sectioning of the affected
trigeminal division as it emerges from the trigeminal ganglion or producing a
lesion in the trigeminal ganglion. Although these procedures may alleviate the
excruciating pain experienced by patients, they also abolish tactile sensation
from the affected area. Sectioning of the descending spinal trigeminal tract
proximal to its termination in the subnucleus caudalis selectively obliterates
the afferents relaying nociception but spares the fibers relaying tactile sensation from the orofacial region.
The abducent nerve supplies
motor innervation to the lateral rectus muscle, which
abducts the eye (a common mnemonic is LR6). The abducent
nerve exits the brainstem at the pontomedullary junction,
then courses anteriorly, traverses the cavernous sinus, and
upon leaving the sinus it passes via the superior orbital
fissure into the orbital fossa where it innervates the ipsilateral
lateral rectus muscle.
Normally, both eyes move together regardless of the
direction of gaze. This is achieved by precise coordinated
action of all the extraocular muscles of both eyes. The oculomotor, trochlear, and abducens nuclei are interconnected and
are controlled by higher brain centers of the cerebral cortex
as well as by the brainstem. During horizontal gaze, when
looking to one side, the lateral rectus muscle of one side and
the medial rectus muscle of the contralateral side contract
simultaneously.
The abducens nucleus and
the internal genu of the facial
nerve form an elevation,
known as the facial colliculus
(L., “little hill”) in the floor of the fourth ventricle. Axons
emerging from the abducens nucleus belong to GSE nerve
cell bodies. The axons course ventrally in the pontine
tegmentum to exit in the ventral aspect of the brainstem at
the pontomedullary junction.
The abducens nucleus contains two different populations
of neurons (Fig. 15.9). One group (which makes up 70% of the
nucleus neurons) consists of the GSE motoneurons, whose
axons form the abducent nerve and project to the ipsilateral
lateral rectus muscle. The second group consists of internuclear neurons. Their axons emerge from the nucleus, immediately decussate and project via the contralateral medial
longitudinal fasciculus (MLF) to the contralateral oculomotor
nucleus. There the internuclear neuron terminals synapse
with motoneurons that project to and innervate the medial
rectus muscle. The MLF interconnects the abducens, trochlear, and oculomotor nuclei so that the two eyes move in
unison. Thus the abducens nucleus mediates conjugate horizontal movement of the eyes.
When higher brain centers stimulate the abducens nucleus
the following occur simultaneously:
1 Stimulation of the GSE motoneurons of the abducens
nucleus that cause the ipsilateral lateral rectus muscle to
contract, causing the eye to abduct.
2 Stimulation of the internuclear neurons of the same
abducens nucleus that project, via the contralateral MLF,
to the contralateral oculomotor nucleus. Here they form
excitatory synapses with the motoneurons projecting
to the contralateral medial rectus muscle causing it to
contract so that the opposite eye adducts, resulting in
coordinated lateral gaze.
GSA input from the lateral rectus muscle is transmitted
centrally to the trigeminal nuclear complex via the processes
of pseudounipolar neurons whose cell bodies are believed
to reside in the mesencephalic nucleus of the trigeminal
nerve.
A lesion in the abducent nerve (GSE, motor fibers) results in paralysis of the
lateral rectus muscle that normally abducts the eye. The eye will then deviate
medially as a result of the unopposed action of the medial rectus (Fig. 15.10).
The individual can turn the ipsilateral eye from its medial position to the center
(looking straight ahead), but not beyond it. This paralysis results in medial
strabismus (convergent, internal strabismus, esotropia). Since the eyes
become misaligned, the individual experiences horizontal diplopia (double
vision; i.e., a single object is perceived as two separate objects next to each
other). The diplopia is greatest in an effort to look toward the side of the lesion
and it is reduced by looking towards the unaffected side since the visual axes
become parallel. The individual realizes that the diplopia is reduced by turning
his head slightly so that his chin is pointing toward the side of the lesion.
Bilateral abducent nerve lesion results in the individual becoming “cross-eyed.”
A lesion involving the abducens nucleus (Fig. 15.11) results in the same
deficiency as a lesion to the abducent nerve, with the addition of the inability
to turn the opposite eye medially as the individual attempts to gaze toward the
side of the lesion. This condition, referred to as lateral gaze paralysis, occurs
because the damaged abducens nucleus no longer provides excitatory input to
the opposite oculomotor nucleus neurons that innervate the medial rectus
muscle.
If the oculomotor, trochlear, and abducent nerves and their nuclei are intact,
but there is a unilateral MLF lesion, eye movements in all directions are possible. However, since the connections between the nuclei of these nerves are
interrupted, horizontal ocular movements will not occur in a conjugate fashion.
When there is a lesion of the right MLF, and the individual attempts to gaze
to the right, the lesion is not apparent, since both eyes can move simultaneously to the right. However, when attempting to gaze to the left, the right eye
cannot move inward (medially beyond the midline) but the left eye, which
should move outward (laterally) in this lateral gaze, does since it is not
affected. If you ask this same individual to look at a near object placed directly
in front of him, which necessitates that both eyes adduct (converge), he is able
to do so. This indicates that: (i) both oculomotor nerves (which innervate the
medial recti) are intact; and (ii) the upper motoneurons arising from the motor
cortex (which stimulate the motoneurons of the oculomotor nuclei) are also
intact. Therefore, a unilateral lesion of the MLF becomes apparent only during
conjugate horizontal eye movement, when gazing away from the side of the
lesion.
A rare condition referred to as “one-and-a-half” results following a lesion in
the vicinity of the abducens nucleus, which involves the entire ipsilateral abducens nucleus as well as the decussating MLF fibers arising from the contralateral abducens nucleus. If a lesion is present in the vicinity of the left
abducens nucleus the following things happen:
1 The GSE motoneurons, whose axons form the left abducent nerve innervating the left lateral rectus, are damaged. Therefore, the left lateral rectus
muscle is paralyzed.
2 The internuclear neurons housed in the left abducens nucleus are also
damaged. Their crossing fibers (coursing in the right MLF) do not, therefore, form excitatory synapses with the motoneurons of the contralateral
oculomotor nucleus that innervate the right medial rectus muscle.
3 The crossing fibers of the internuclear neurons arising from the contralateral (right) abducens nucleus are also damaged; thus they do not
form excitatory synapses with the motoneurons of the left oculomotor nucleus
that innervate the left medial rectus.
Therefore, when attempting to gaze to the left, the left eye will not abduct
and the right eye will not adduct during conjugate horizontal gaze to the left.
When attempting to gaze to the right, the right eye responds normally, that is it
is able to abduct, whereas the left eye will not be able to adduct during conjugate horizontal gaze to the right. It is important to note that the innervation
to all the extraocular muscles of both eyes is intact, except one—the left lateral
rectus. If you ask this individual to look at a near object placed directly in front
of him, both eyes will converge, since both medial recti and their innervation
(branches of the oculomotor nerve) are intact. Thus this type of lesion becomes
apparent only during conjugate horizontal eye movement.
The facial nerve (Fig. 15.12)
provides branchiomotor
innervation to the muscles
of facial expression, the
platysma, the posterior belly of the digastric muscle, the
stylohyoid muscle, and the stapedius muscle. It also transmits taste sensation from the anterior two-thirds of the tongue,
as well as parasympathetic (secretomotor) innervation to
the lacrimal, submandibular, and sublingual glands. Additionally, it provides general sensation to the back of the ear,
pinna, and external auditory meatus, as well as visceral sensation from the nasal cavity and the soft palate.
The facial nerve consists of two parts: the facial nerve
proper and the nervus intermedius. The facial nerve proper
is the motor root of the facial nerve consisting of the axons of
SVE (branchiomotor) neurons whose cell bodies reside in
the facial nucleus. This nucleus contains subnuclei, each
supplying specific muscles or groups of muscles. The nervus
intermedius is sometimes referred to as the “sensory root,”
which is a misnomer since in addition to sensory fibers it also
carries parasympathetic fibers. The nervus intermedius
consists of the axons of the GVE (secretomotor) parasympathetic neurons, whose cell bodies reside in the superior
salivatory nucleus. It also contains the central processes of
first order, sensory pseudounipolar neurons whose cell
bodies are housed in the geniculate (L., “bent like a knee”)
ganglion, the only sensory ganglion of the facial nerve. Some
of these pseudounipolar neurons transmit SVA (taste) sensation from the anterior two-thirds of the tongue, others convey
GSA sensation from the area posterior to the ear, whereas
others carry GVA sensation from the nasal cavity and soft
palate.
Both nerve roots (motor root and nervus intermedius)
emerge from the brainstem at the cerebellopontine angle.
Near their exit from the brainstem, the two roots of the
facial nerve accompany one another to the internal acoustic
meatus of the petrous portion of the temporal bone and 
proceed to the facial canal where the nervus intermedius
presents a swelling—the geniculate ganglion.
The facial nerve gives rise to three of its branches in the
facial canal: the greater petrosal nerve, the nerve to the
stapedius muscle (which innervates the stapedius muscle in
the middle ear), and the chorda tympani nerve. The facial
nerve exits the facial canal via the stylomastoid foramen and
courses to the parotid bed where its main trunk gives rise to
numerous muscular branches, which radiate from within the
substance of the gland to innervate their respective muscles
(muscles of facial expression, platysma, posterior belly of the
digastric, and stylohyoid muscles).
The superior salivatory nucleus contains GVE preganglionic parasympathetic nerve cell bodies (Figs 15.12, 15.13)
whose axons leave the brainstem via the nervus intermedius.
These preganglionic fibers are distributed by the greater petrosal and chorda tympani nerves. The fibers in the greater
petrosal nerve subsequently join the nerve of the pterygoid
canal to enter the pterygopalatine fossa where they terminate
and synapse in the pterygopalatine ganglion, one of the two
parasympathetic ganglia of the facial nerve. Postganglionic
parasympathetic fibers from this ganglion are distributed
to the lacrimal gland and the glands of the nasal and oral
cavity to provide them with secretomotor innervation. The
chorda tympani nerve joins the lingual nerve, a branch of
the mandibular division of the trigeminal nerve. The chorda
tympani carries preganglionic parasympathetic fibers to
the submandibular ganglion (the second parasympathetic
ganglion of the facial nerve), where the fibers synapse with
its postganglionic parasympathetic neurons. The postganglionic parasympathetic fibers from this ganglion course to
the submandibular and sublingual glands providing them
with secretomotor innervation.
The geniculate ganglion houses the cell bodies of the
SVA neurons, which are responsible for transmission of
taste sensation from the anterior two-thirds of the tongue
(Fig. 15.14). The peripheral processes of these neurons run in
the chorda tympani, and reach the tongue via the lingual
nerve of the mandibular division of the trigeminal nerve. The
central processes of the SVA neurons enter the brainstem via
the nervus intermedius to join the ipsilateral solitary tract
and terminate in the solitary nucleus.
Other pseudounipolar neurons of the geniculate ganglion
mediate GVA sensation. Their peripheral processes run in the
greater petrosal nerve and terminate in the nasal cavity and
the soft palate. Their central processes course in the nervus
intermedius, join the ipsilateral solitary tract, and terminate
in the solitary nucleus.
Still other pseudounipolar neurons of the geniculate ganglion are responsible for pain, temperature, and touch sensation from the pinna and the external auditory meatus (GSA
fibers). The peripheral processes of these neurons terminate
in the pinna and the external auditory meatus. Their central
processes course in the nervus intermedius and join the
spinal tract of the trigeminal, and terminate to synapse in the
spinal nucleus of the trigeminal.
A unilateral lesion of the facial nerve near its root or in the facial canal prior to
giving off any of its branches (thus damaging all of its fibers), results in the following conditions ipsilateral to the lesion: damage to the SVE (branchiomotor
fibers), results in a flaccid paralysis or paresis (impairment) of the muscles of
facial expression, the platysma, stylohyoid, and posterior belly of the digastric
muscles with subsequent muscle atrophy. The stapedius muscle will also be
paralyzed and the individual will experience hyperacusis (an acute sense of
hearing). Usually the stapedius muscle dampens vibrations of the ossicles, but
when it is paralyzed, vibrations from the tympanic membrane are transmitted
to the ossicles and subsequently to the inner ear receptors for hearing.
Furthermore, damage of the SVA fibers relaying taste results in a loss of taste
from the anterior two-thirds of the tongue. Damage of the GVE parasympathetic fibers causes decreased salivary secretion from the submandibular
and sublingual glands. Since both parotid glands (innervated by a different
cranial nerve) and the contralateral sublingual and submandibular glands
remain functional, it is difficult to determine from salivary action alone
whether there is an interruption of the parasympathetic innervation to the
ipsilateral submandibular and sublingual glands. In addition, the efferent limb
of the corneal blink reflex will be damaged.
Bell’s palsy may be idiopathic, or result following trauma or viral infection
of the facial nerve within the facial canal or near its exit from the stylomastoid
foramen. This condition is characterized by a paresis or paralysis of the muscles
of facial expression ipsilateral to the lesion. Bell’s phenomenon is exhibited
by individuals with a Bell’s palsy. As the individual attempts to close the eyes,
the eye on the affected side deviates up and out.
A unilateral lesion of the facial nerve proximal to the geniculate ganglion
causes loss of tear formation by the ipsilateral lacrimal gland. A condition
referred to as “crocodile tear syndrome” (lacrimation while eating) may
result as follows. As the preganglionic parasympathetic (“salivation”) fibers
originating from the superior salivatory nucleus are regenerating, they may
be unsuccessful at finding their way to their intended destination, the submandibular ganglion, and instead take a wrong route to terminate in the
pterygopalatine ganglion. The fibers then establish inappropriate synaptic
contacts with postganglionic (“lacrimation”) neurons whose fibers project to
the lacrimal gland.
The vestibulocochlear nerve
consists of two distinct and
separate nerves enclosed
within one connective tissue
sheath, the vestibular nerve
(concerned with position
sense and balance) and the cochlear nerve (concerned with
hearing). Both nerves transmit SSA information from specialized peripheral ciliated mechanoreceptors (“hair cells”).
The cell bodies of the sensory first order bipolar neurons
of the vestibular nerve reside within the vestibular ganglion
of Scarpa (see Fig. 18.6). Their peripheral processes terminate
in special receptors, the cristae in the ampullae of the semicircular ducts and the maculae of the utricle and saccule,
housed within the petrous temporal bone (see Figs 18.2–18.4).
The central processes of these neurons enter the brainstem to
synapse not only in the vestibular nuclear complex, where
they synapse with second order neurons of the vestibular
pathway, but also in the cerebellum (see Fig. 18.6). The
vestibular nerve is unique since it is the only cranial nerve
that sends the central processes of some of its first order
neurons to synapse directly in the cerebellum.
The cell bodies of the sensory first order bipolar neurons
of the cochlear nerve are housed within the spiral (cochlear)
ganglion (see Fig. 17.3). Their peripheral processes terminate
and synapse in the organ of Corti, containing the special
receptors that transduce sound waves into electric impulses.
The spiral ganglion and the organ of Corti lie within the
cochlea, a snailshell-shaped structure of the inner ear, embedded within the petrous temporal bone (see Fig. 17.3). The
central processes of these neurons accompany the seventh
vestibular nerve to synapse in the cochlear nuclei in the
brainstem with second order neurons of the auditory pathway (see Fig. 17.4).
The glossopharyngeal nerve,
one of the smallest cranial
nerves, carries five functional
components. These are: (i)
SVA (taste) and (ii) GVA sensation from the posterior
one-third of the tongue, the adjacent pharyngeal wall, and
the carotid sinus (a baroreceptor or blood pressure receptor
located near the bifurcation of the common carotid artery),
(iii) GSA sensation from the external ear, (iv) SVE (branchiomotor) innervation to the stylopharyngeus muscle, and
(v) GVE parasympathetic innervation to the parotid gland.
The glossopharyngeal nerve exits the brainstem as a
group of rootlets posterior to the olive in the dorsolateral
sulcus. These rootlets immediately collect to form the main
trunk of the glossopharyngeal nerve, which shortly exits the
cranial vault via the jugular foramen where it presents two
swellings, its superior and inferior ganglia (Fig. 15.15). The
superior ganglion contains GSA, and the inferior ganglion
contains GVA and SVA, cell bodies of first order pseudounipolar neurons.
The inferior ganglion of the glossopharyngeal nerve houses
the cell bodies of the SVA (taste) neurons. Their peripheral
processes course with the trunk of the glossopharyngeal
nerve to the tongue where they supply the posterior one-third
of the tongue and adjacent pharyngeal wall with taste sensation. The central processes of the SVA neurons pass into the
brainstem via the glossopharyngeal nerve root, join the solitary tract and terminate in the solitary nucleus (Fig. 15.16A).
GVA first order nerve cell bodies reside in the inferior
ganglion of the glossopharyngeal nerve. Their peripheral
processes terminate in the mucosa of the posterior one-third
of the tongue, tonsil and adjacent pharyngeal wall, tympanic
cavity, and auditory tube (Fig. 15.16B). Unilateral stimulation
of the pharyngeal wall elicits a bilateral contraction of the
pharyngeal muscles and soft palate (gag reflex). The glossopharyngeal nerve serves as the afferent limb (GVA peripheral fibers whose cell bodies are housed in the inferior
ganglion), whereas the vagus nerve provides the efferent
limb of the reflex arc. The central processes of the afferent
fibers enter the solitary tract and synapse in the nucleus
ambiguus. The nucleus ambiguus sends motor fibers via the
vagus nerve to the muscles of the palate and pharynx. Many
individuals in the general population do not have a gag
reflex.
Baroreceptor fibers terminate in the carotid body and
sinus, which form the afferent limb of the reflex arc that
controls blood pressure. The central processes of the GVA
neurons enter the brainstem via the glossopharyngeal nerve
root, join the solitary tract and terminate in the solitary nucleus. The solitary nucleus relays sensory input to the reticular
formation, the brainstem GVE (autonomic) motor nuclei, and
the intermediolateral horn (containing preganglionic sympathetic neurons) of the spinal cord for reflex activity related
to the control of arterial lumen diameter and blood pressure.
The glossopharyngeal nerve also provides GSA touch,
pain, and temperature innervation to the pinna of the ear and
the external auditory meatus. The cell bodies of these sensory
neurons are located in the superior ganglion of the glossopharyngeal nerve. The central processes of these neurons
course in the glossopharyngeal nerve root, enter the brainstem, and join the spinal tract of the trigeminal nerve to terminate and synapse in the spinal nucleus of the trigeminal
nerve. Recent clinical evidence supports that fibers transmitting nociceptive sensory input from the pharyngeal wall and
posterior one-third of the tongue enter the brainstem and
descend in the spinal tract of the trigeminal and terminate in
the spinal nucleus of the trigeminal. Furthermore, sensation from
oral structures is transmitted via the glossopharyngeal afferent terminals to the main sensory nucleus of the trigeminal.
The nucleus ambiguus contains the SVE branchiomotor
nerve cell bodies whose axons emerge from the brainstem
along with rootlets of the glossopharyngeal nerve, and course
with the trunk of the glossopharyngeal nerve (Fig. 15.16C).
These axons then leave the glossopharyngeal nerve as the
nerve to the stylopharyngeus muscle, the only muscle innervated by the glossopharyngeal nerve.
The inferior salivatory nucleus, located in the medulla,
contains the GVE cell bodies of preganglionic parasympathetic neurons whose axons exit the brainstem as part of
the glossopharyngeal nerve (Fig. 15.16D). These fibers then
branch off as the tympanic nerve and subsequently spread
out to form the tympanic plexus in the tympanic cavity.
The preganglionic parasympathetic fibers course to the otic
ganglion, the parasympathetic ganglion of the glossopharyngeal nerve (located in the infratemporal fossa), where they
synapse with postganglionic parasympathetic neurons whose
fibers join the auriculotemporal branch of the trigeminal
nerve to reach the parotid gland, providing it with secretomotor innervation.
A unilateral lesion to the glossopharyngeal nerve near its exit from
the brainstem, damaging all of its fibers, will result in damage to the SVA
fibers relaying taste sensation and will cause ipsilateral loss of taste
sensation from the posterior one-third of the tongue. Damage to the GVE
parasympathetic fibers will cause a reduction in salivary secretion of
the parotid gland; and damage to the GVA fibers will result in diminished
visceral sensation from the pharyngeal mucous membrane, loss of the
gag reflex (due to damage of the afferent limb of the reflex arc), and loss
of the carotid sinus reflex. The stylopharyngeus muscle, which elevates
the pharynx during swallowing, will be paralyzed.
The vagus (L., “wanderer”)
nerve (Fig. 15.17) is a large
cranial nerve that has the
most extensive distribution
in the body. Although it is a
cranial nerve, its innervation is not limited to the structures
in the head, but also extends into the neck, thorax, and
abdomen. The vagus nerve carries five functional components: (i) SVA; (ii) GVA; (iii) GSA; (iv) SVE; and (v) GVE (the
same functional components carried by the facial and glossopharyngeal nerves). A group of fine rootlets surface in the
medulla in the dorsolateral sulcus, inferior to the glossopharyngeal nerve and superior to the spinal accessory nerve. The
rootlets join to form two distinct bundles—a smaller inferior
and a larger superior that collectively form the vagus nerve.
The inferior bundle joins the spinal accessory nerve and
accompanies it for a short distance, but then the two diverge
to go their separate ways. The smaller vagal bundle joins
the main trunk of the vagus to exit the cranial vault via the
jugular foramen. Inferior to the jugular foramen, the vagus
nerve displays two swellings, the superior (jugular) and inferior (nodose) ganglia. The superior ganglion houses the cell
bodies of pseudounipolar first order sensory neurons carrying GSA information from the pinna of the ear and external
auditory meatus and the dura of the posterior cranial fossa.
The inferior ganglion contains the pseudounipolar first
order nerve cell bodies transmitting GVA sensory innervation from the mucosa of the soft palate, pharynx, and larynx,
and a minor SVA (taste) sensation from the epiglottis.
SVA (taste) pseudounipolar neuron cell bodies located in
the inferior ganglion of the vagus nerve send their peripheral
fibers to terminate in the scant taste buds of the epiglottis.
Their central processes enter the brainstem along with the
other vagal fibers to terminate in the solitary nucleus
(Fig. 15.18A).
GVA pseudounipolar neuron cell bodies housed in the
inferior ganglion distribute their peripheral processes in
the mucous membranes of the soft palate, and those lining
the pharynx, larynx, esophagus, and trachea. Chemoreceptor
fibers (GVA also) terminate in the carotid body where they
monitor blood carbon dioxide concentration. The central processes of all of the GVA neurons enter the brainstem, course
in the solitary tract and terminate in the solitary nucleus
(Fig. 15.18A).
GSA pseudounipolar neuron cell bodies conveying pain,
temperature, and touch sensation reside in the superior
ganglion and send their peripheral processes to the pinna,
external auditory meatus, skin of the ear, and tympanic membrane. Their central processes enter the brainstem, join the
spinal tract of the trigeminal and terminate in the spinal
nucleus of the trigeminal (Fig. 15.18A).
The cell bodies of the SVE branchiomotor neurons are
located in the nucleus ambiguus. The fibers of these neurons
innervate all of the laryngeal and pharyngeal muscles with
the exception of the stylopharyngeus and the tensor veli
palatini muscles (Fig. 15.18B).
The vagus nerve has a very extensive GVE distribution. It
supplies parasympathetic innervation to the laryngeal
mucous glands and all of the thoracic and most of the abdominal organs. The dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus houses
the nerve cell bodies of preganglionic parasympathetic neurons whose fibers accompany the other vagal fibers upon
their exit from the brainstem. These fibers run in the main
trunk of the vagus into the thorax where they leave the main
trunk and join the autonomic plexuses scattered throughout the thoracic and abdominal cavities. The preganglionic fibers
terminate and synapse in the terminal parasympathetic ganglia or ganglia near or within the viscera. Parasympathetic
innervation decreases the heart rate (calms the heart),
reduces adrenal gland secretion, activates peristalsis, and
stimulates glandular activity of various organs (Fig. 15.18C).
Unilateral damage of the vagus nerve near its emergence from the brainstem results in a number of deficiencies on the ipsilateral side. Damage to
the SVE branchiomotor fibers will cause flaccid paralysis or weakness
of: (i) the pharyngeal muscles and levator veli palatini of the soft palate,
resulting in dysphagia (difficulty swallowing); (ii) the laryngeal muscles,
resulting in dysphonia (hoarseness) and dyspnea (difficulty breathing);
and (iii) loss of the gag reflex (efferent limb). Damage to the GVA fibers
will cause loss of general sensation from the soft palate, pharynx,
larynx, esophagus, and trachea. Damage to the GVE fibers will cause
cardiac arrhythmias.
A bilateral lesion of the vagus nerve is incompatible with life, due to
the interruption of parasympathetic innervation to the heart.
The spinal accessory nerve
(Fig. 15.19) supplies motor
innervation to the sternocleidomastoid, trapezius, and
many of the intrinsic laryngeal muscles. In the early literature this nerve was described
as consisting of two distinct parts: a cranial (bulbar) and a
spinal root. It is now understood that the “cranial root” of the
accessory nerve is composed of aberrant vagal fibers arising
from the nucleus ambiguus in the medulla. These vagal
fibers collectively form a distinct root as they emerge from the
brainstem. On the other hand, the spinal accessory nerve
derives its fibers from the spinal accessory nucleus residing
in the posterolateral aspect of the ventral horns of cervical
spinal cord levels C2–C5 (or C6). This nucleus is continuous
superiorly with the nucleus ambiguus of the medulla.
Delicate rootlets emerging from the surface of the lateral
funiculus of the spinal cord (interposed between the dorsal
and ventral spinal roots) converge and assemble to form the
spinal accessory nerve. This nerve trunk ascends, enters the
cranial vault through the foramen magnum, and proceeds on
the lateral aspect of the medulla to join the aberrant vagal
fibers as they emerge from the medulla. The two groups of
fibers accompany one another for a short distance but then
diverge to go their separate ways. The aberrant vagal fibers
join the main trunk of the vagus nerve and follow those fibers
of the vagus that are destined to supply most of the intrinsic
laryngeal muscles. The spinal accessory nerve exits the cranial vault via the jugular foramen. It courses inferiorly to the
deep surface of the sternocleidomastoid muscle providing
it with motor innervation. It continues its inferior course to
the posterior triangle of the neck and then proceeds to the
deep aspect of the upper part of the trapezius muscle to supply it with motor innervation. In view of its origin, many
neuroanatomists no longer consider the accessory nerve to
be a true cranial nerve, but instead a unique type of spinal
nerve.
Additionally, there are differences of opinion relating to
the classification of the functional components of the spinal
accessory nerve. Some authors consider that this nerve carries branchiomotor SVE fibers since neurons of the spinal
accessory nucleus develop in a manner characteristic of SVE,
not GSE, neurons; whereas others believe that they are
somatomotor, that is GSE.
Recent literature supports that GSA proprioceptive fibers
are carried by the spinal accessory nerve from the upper
cervical spinal cord levels to the structures it innervates,
but questions the branchial arch origins of the trapezius and
sternocleidomastoid muscles.
A unilateral lesion confined to the spinal accessory nucleus or the nerve
proximal to its muscular distribution results in an ipsilateral flaccid
paralysis and subsequent atrophy of the sternocleidomastoid and upper
part of the trapezius muscles. An individual with such a lesion is unable to
turn his or her head away from the lesion. Normally, unilateral contraction
of the sternocleidomastoid muscle draws the mastoid process inferiorly,
bending the head sideways (approximating the ear to the shoulder), which
is accompanied by an upward turning of the chin towards the opposite
side. If the upper part of the trapezius is paralyzed, the upper border of the
scapula is rotated laterally and inferiorly with its inferior angle pointing
towards the spine. This results in slight drooping of the ipsilateral shoulder,
accompanied by a weakening of the shoulder when attempting to raise it.
The hypoglossal nerve
(Fig. 15.20) provides motor
innervation to the muscles of
the tongue. The cell bodies of
the GSE lower motoneurons of the hypoglossal nerve reside
in the hypoglossal nucleus, a cell column in the medulla.
This nucleus, located ventral to the floor of the fourth
ventricle near the midline, forms a triangular elevation—the
hypoglossal trigone—in the floor of the midline of the
ventricle. The nerve cell bodies of the hypoglossal nucleus
give rise to axons that course ventrally to arise as a series
of tiny rootlets on the ventral surface of the medulla in the
sulcus separating the pyramid and the olive. These rootlets
collect to form the hypoglossal nerve, which exits the cranial
vault through the hypoglossal foramen. The nerve then
courses to the submandibular region to serve the ipsilateral
side of the tongue. The hypoglossal nerve innervates the
intrinsic muscles (transverse, longitudinals, and vertical)
and all the extrinsic muscles of the tongue (styloglossus,
hyoglossus, and genioglossus) with the exception of the
palatoglossus. Recent studies indicate that GSA fibers terminating in muscle spindles of the tongue musculature transmit
proprioceptive sensation to the trigeminal system involved
in reflex activity of mastication. Some investigators believe
that the cell bodies of these GSA pseudounipolar neurons are
located in the mesencephalic nucleus of the trigeminal nerve,
whereas others maintain that they are dispersed along the
hypoglossal nerve.
A lesion in the hypoglossal nucleus or nerve results in flaccid paralysis
and subsequent atrophy of the ipsilateral tongue musculature.
Hemiparalysis of the tongue causes creasing (wrinkling) of the dorsal surface of the tongue ipsilateral to the lesion. Normally, the simultaneous
contraction of the paired genioglossi muscles causes the tongue to protrude straightforward. During examination of the patient it is important to
remember that a unilateral lesion of the hypoglossal nerve will cause the
tongue to deviate towards the side of the lesion (impaired side) since the
functional genioglossus on the intact side is unopposed by the paralyzed,
inactive genioglossus on the lesion side.
This patient has trigeminal
neuralgia, also called tic
douloureux. This is a purely clinical
diagnosis, and tests are usually normal.
This is a very common disorder, and
this is a typical presentation. The pain
is indeed excruciating and should be
taken very seriously, as suicide is not an
uncommon result!
This condition is most common in the
elderly, though it can occur in younger
age groups. The common etiology is
thought to be from ephaptic transmission
of nerve impulses, or in other words
“short circuiting.” The most common
cause is from vascular “loops” that
develop and surround one of the
divisions of the trigeminal nerve at its
root, most commonly affecting the
ophthalmic and sometimes the maxillary
divisions. This causes compression of
the nerve, demyelination, and ephaptic
transmission. This condition is usually
spontaneous and comes “out of the blue.”
Trigeminal neuralgia in a young person
brings up the specter of multiple sclerosis.
Multiple sclerosis is a disease of the
central nervous system, and can be a
cause of trigeminal neuralgia. This is
thought to result from demyelination of
the trigeminal nerve root as it enters the
brainstem.
There are effective treatments for this
condition. Carbamazepine, an antiseizure
medication, is the most effective. Other
antiseizure medications have been used.
Trigeminal neuralgia from vascular loops
can be treated, if refractory to medications, by microvascular decompression
surgery. This surgical procedure generated much skepticism when it was first
introduced, but has produced excellent
results for refractory cases and has now
become widely accepted.
A 32-year-old woman
describes visual loss in the right
eye. She first noticed its onset a week ago,
and since then it has become progressively worse over the course of 2 days.
She can no longer see with her right eye.
The left eye is normal. There is also some
pain in the right eye when she moves her
eyes. She has never had eye or visual
problems prior to this episode. She
otherwise has no complaints, her health
has always been perfect, and she has
never had any neurologic symptoms in
the past.
An ophthalmology exam shows visual
acuity of 20/20 on the left, while on the
right she is not able to read the largest
numbers on the number chart but is able
to count fingers that are presented to her.
Pupillary constriction to light in the left is
normal, while reaction on the right is present but seems less brisk. Funduscopic
exam shows papilledema (swelling) of
the right optic disc while the left is normal. Eye movements are intact, although
the patient complains of some pain on
movement of the right eye. The rest of the
neurologic exam is normal.
The visual system is one of the most important of all the
sensory (afferent) systems in humans since it transmits an
extraordinary amount of information perceived about our
environment to higher brain centers.
The eyes are intricate sensory organs that mediate the special sense of sight. They resemble two autofocusing cameras,
each consisting of a lens that not only allows the passage of,
but also focuses, light reflected from objects on the retina. The
retina contains photosensitive cells, rods and cones, which
transmit sensory input related to color, light intensity, and
form reflected from objects to other cells of the retina. This
sensory input is further processed, and visual information is
conveyed by other retinal cells to higher brain centers, where
a visual image is formed.
Although the bulb of the eye consists of three concentric layers,
each layer is not present throughout the entire wall of the
eye. The three layers are an external (outer) fibrous layer, a
middle layer, and an internal (inner) layer. From posterior to
anterior, the outer layer is composed of the sclera and cornea;
the middle layer includes the choroid, ciliary body, and iris;
whereas the inner layer is formed by the retina (Fig. 16.1).
The posterior five-sixths of
the external layer is a tough,
opaque, white collagenous
connective tissue, the sclera (G. scleros, “hard”), which forms
a protective rigid layer for the bulb of the eye. The anterior
one-sixth of the outer layer is modified as the cornea, a transparent avascular region that bulges anteriorly. The cornea
not only permits light to pass through to enter the eye, but
it also refracts it. The region of the sclera, surrounding the
cornea, is apparent as the “white of the eye.” Posteriorly, the
sclera permits the optic nerve to pass through its fenestrated
region, the lamina cribrosa.
The middle layer appears
dark, due to the presence
of melanin pigments in its
cells. Since it resembles the skin of a dark grape, it is called
the uvea (L. uva, “grape”). The posterior aspect of the
middle layer, known as the choroid, is the vascular coat of
the eye. The choroid not only has an important nutritive function for the retina, but its pigmented cells absorb excess light
that has passed through the retina, reducing light reflection
and glare inside the bulb. At its anterior margin, the choroid
merges with a thickened structure, the ciliary body and its
processes, at the ora serrata. The ora serrata is the serrated
margin between the choroid and the ciliary body. The ciliary
body houses the ciliary muscle, a smooth muscle, that
changes the shape of the lens for accommodation. The ciliary
body is continuous anteriorly with the iris, a pigmented
diaphragm that encircles a space known as the pupil. The iris
overlaps the anterior surface of the lens, and its color is visible
through the transparent cornea. Smooth muscle activity
in the iris results in the constriction or dilation of the pupil,
controlling the amount of light that may enter the eye. The
diaphragm-like opening and closing of the iris is controlled
by two smooth muscles, the sphincter pupillae, innervated
by the parasympathetic nervous system whose contraction constricts the pupil, and the dilatator pupillae, innervated by
the sympathetic nervous system, and whose contraction dilates
the pupil.
The delicate internal layer
of the eye is the retina. It is
composed of an outer layer,
the pigment epithelium which underlies the choroid, and an
inner layer, the retina proper or neural retina (Fig. 16.2). The
pigment epithelium consists of a layer of pigmented cells
that absorb light that has passed through the retina. The
neural retina contains the layers of nerve cells responsible
for the processing and transmission of visual information.
The photosensitive portion of the neural retina extends from
the ora serrata to the optic disc. The nonphotosensitive
portion of the retina extends from the ora serrata anteriorly,
where it lines the inner surface of the ciliary body and iris.
The elements of the optic nerve collect into a bundle at the
optic disc and pierce all the three layers of the bulb to exit the
eye (Fig. 16.1). The optic disc is insensitive to light (since it
lacks photoreceptors) resulting in a blind spot in the visual
field. The macula lutea (L., “yellow spot”) is a yellow spot of
the retina in the back of the eye, whose central pit, the fovea
centralis, contains only cones and represents the site of maximal visual acuity and color perception.
The neural retina is a multilayered structure. These layers
contain supporting glia (Müller cells) and astrocytes, as
well as six types of neurons that process visual input prior to
its transmission to the diencephalon. They are the photoreceptors (100–120 million rods and 6–7 million cones), the
conducting neurons (bipolar cells and ganglion cells), and
the association neurons or interneurons (horizontal cells
and amacrine cells), which modulate the activity of the
bipolar and ganglion cells.
The retina consists of the following 10 layers (Fig. 16.2).
1 Pigment epithelium. The deepest layer of the retina
consists of pigmented cells. This is a non-neural layer
that absorbs excess light which has passed through
the other retinal layers, and is immediately next to the
choroid.
2 Rod and cone layer. This layer includes the outer and
inner segments of the photoreceptor cells (rods and
cones). The discs of the photoreceptors contain visual
pigments that undergo chemical changes (following
absorption of light) leading to the initiation of local
receptor potentials.
3 External (outer) limiting membrane. Although this
appears to be a membrane, actually its not. It is formed
by intercellular junctions—the zonulae adherents—
binding the apical aspect of the Müller cells.
4 Outer nuclear layer. This consists of the cell bodies of the
rods and cones.
5 Outer plexiform layer. This is a synaptic area that contains the terminals of the rods and cones, as well as those
of the retinal interneurons (horizontal cells) and bipolar
cells. The rods and cones synapse with the horizontal
and bipolar cells. The horizontal cells join the photoreceptor cells laterally.
6 Inner nuclear layer. This consists of the somata of the
retinal interneurons (horizontal, bipolar, and amacrine
cells), which integrate and modulate the activity of the
photoreceptors.
7 Inner plexiform layer. This is a synaptic area containing
the terminals of the bipolar, amacrine, and ganglion
cells. Amacrine cells link the ganglion cells laterally.
8 Ganglion cell layer. This consists of the somata of the
ganglion cells (multipolar neurons).
9 Optic nerve fiber layer. This is composed of the axons
of the ganglion cells that gather to form a thick bundle,
the optic nerve. These axons terminate primarily in the
lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) of the thalamus.
10 Internal (inner) limiting membrane. This membrane
is composed of a basal lamina interposed between the
vitreous body and the Müller cells. The vitreous body
is a gelatinous substance filling the vitreous space of
the bulb of the eye, posterior to the lens. The internal
limiting membrane separates the neural retina from the
vitreous body.
Sensory input from the photoreceptors is transmitted
to a synaptic zone stimulating bipolar cells, which in turn
transmit the information to ganglion cells. Horizontal and
amacrine cells link the conducting neurons laterally within
the retina. The convergent circuitry of the rods on the bipolar
cells results in a decrease in visual acuity. High acuity would
result from a 1 : 1 ratio of rods to bipolar cells: one tiny portion
of the visual field would be mapped to one bipolar cell.
Instead, many rods representing a larger portion of the visual
field are mapped to one bipolar cell, so that cell represents a
larger portion of the visual field. There is little convergence in
the macula lutea of the retina, the site of highest visual acuity.
The supporting Müller cells (specialized glia cells) extend
the entire thickness of the retina from the internal to the
external limiting membrane.
The cones (Fig. 16.3B) are activated by high intensity light
(photopic vision). They mediate sharp vision and color
vision. They detect fine detail, have the highest acuity, and
are more numerous in the central portion of the retina and
less concentrated at the periphery. There are three different
types of cones in the human retina, the membrane of each
cone being associated with a different pigment, and responding to a different wavelength of light (red, blue, or yellowgreen sensitive).
Rods are of a single type only (Fig. 16.3A). They are stimulated by low intensity light; thus they transmit visual input in
dim illumination (scotopic vision) but they cannot detect
colors. They are more concentrated in peripheral regions of
the retina. At night, when looking straight at a light located
at a distance, it disappears when projected on the fovea
(which contains only color-sensitive cones), but when looking away from it, the image falls on more peripheral regions
of the retina, where rods are more numerous, and therefore
the image becomes visible.
Rods and cones are composed of an inner segment, a
connecting stalk, and an
outer segment. The inner
segment encloses the cellular organelles and is the site
of protein synthesis, such as
the protein component of the photopigments. The connecting stalk is the narrow segment interposed between the inner
and outer segments. The photoreceptor cells derive their
name from the morphology of their outer segment—that of a
rod being cylindrical, and that of a cone being conical. The
outer segment is the dendritic end of the photoreceptor and is
a photosensitive-modified cilium, which is located adjacent
to the retinal pigment epithelium. The photoreceptor outer
segment consists of a stack of horizontally oriented, membranous, flattened discs derived from the plasma membrane. In
rods, the hollow discs located at the apical end of the outer
segment are intracellular, and are completely separated from
the plasma membrane. The discs located closer to the base of
the rod outer segment, and the entire outer segment of the
cones, consist of shelf-like infoldings of the plasma membrane. They are thus a continuation of the plasma membrance
with their interior being continuous with the intercellular
space (Fig. 16.3).
A light-absorbing photopigment is synthesized in the
inner segments of both rods and cones, and is then transported to their respective outer segments (by passing
through the connecting stalk), where it is incorporated into
disc membranes as transmembrane proteins. The membrane
of rods is associated with the pigment rhodopsin (G., “visual
purple”), whereas the membrane of cones is associated with a
pigment that consists of a component chemical of iodopsin.
Rhodopsin and iodopsin are almost identical chemically,
with the exception of their spectral sensitivity difference
(thus, only the photochemistry of rhodopsin is discussed
below). Both rhodopsin and iodopsin consist of two components: an opsin, which is a protein moiety, and a chromophore (G., “bearing color”), which absorbs photons. In
rods the opsin is known as scotopsin (G. scotos, “darkness”),
whereas in cones the opsins are known as photopsins (G.
photos, “light”). The chromophore associated with rods is
retinal, a substance derived from vitamin A. Normal vision
is dependent on a sufficient intake of vitamin A. A severe
dietary deficiency of vitamin A results in night blindness,
a condition characterized by the inability to see in poor
illumination.
Rhodopsin is a transmembrane homologue of G-proteinlinked receptor molecules that acts by activating a trimeric
G-protein (transducin, Gt
). It is composed of a protein
segment, opsin (embedded in the membranes of rod discs),
to which a vitamin A derivative, 11-cis-retinal, is covalently
attached. The plasma membrane of the rod outer segment
contains cGMP-gated Na+ channels to which cGMP is bound
in the absence of light. The cGMP–Na+ channel complex
maintains the channel in an open state, so that Na+ as well Ca+
can enter the outer segment. The constant flow of Na+ ions
into the outer segment causes a high rate of neurotransmitter
release from the synaptic region of the rod, resulting in the
inhibition of postsynaptic retinal neurons in the dark.
When a photon hits the 11-cis-retinal molecule, it
isomerizes to all-trans-retinal, and this change in molecular
configuration causes an alteration in the conformation of
the opsin to which it is attached. This conformational change
of the opsin moiety results in the binding of rhodopsin to
transducin which, in turn, dissociates and its alpha subunit
activates the enzyme cGMP phosphodiesterase. Since this
enzyme functions to hydrolyze cGMP, decreasing its cytosolic concentration, cGMP is released from the Na+ channels
causing the closure of these channels. The lack of Na+ flow
into the outer segment causes a hyperpolarization of the rod
with a resultant shutdown of neurotransmitter release from
its synaptic region. Since the neurotransmitter substance
inhibits the postsynaptic retinal neurons, the absence of the
neurotransmitter acts to excite them. Thus a single photon
has the capability of eliciting a visual response.
The closed state of the Na+ channel also shuts off the flow
of Ca+ into the outer segment of the rod. This decrease in
cytosolic Ca+ causes the uncoupling of Ca+ from the cytosolic
protein recoverin, resulting in its activation. The activated
recoverin stimulates guanylyl cyclase to manufacture cGMP
which, by binding to the guanylyl cyclase, opens the Na+
channels so that the rod can revert to its dark-phase (resting)
state.
The human eye consists of
two “lenses,” the cornea and
the lens (see Fig. 16.1). Light
rays entering the eye are
actually refracted mostly by
the cornea, and not the lens. The lens is a biconvex, transparent adjustable structure, whose shape can be adjusted
in order to focus the corneal image on the retina. The lens is
suspended posterior to the iris by the suspensory ligaments
of the lens, which are anchored to the ciliary processes of the
ciliary body. The lens inverts and reverses the image and
focuses it on the retina. In order for incoming light to reach
the retina, it has to pass through the following refractive
media of the eye:
1 The cornea. This is the chief refracting medium of the eye.
It serves to focus a crude image on the retina.
2 The anterior chamber of the eye. This is a fluid-filled
(aqueous humor) space between the lens and the cornea.
3 The lens. The shape (thickness) of the lens can be altered,
which can fine focus the corneal image on the retina.
4 The vitreous body. This is a transparent gelatinous
substance filling the vitreous space of the bulb of the eye,
posterior to the lens.
5 Most layers of the neural retina. In order for light to reach
the photoreceptors (rods and cones), which are located at
the “back” of the retina, light has to first go through the
overlying retinal layers (layers 3–10, see above) in order to
reach them.
Incoming light rays impinging on the retina pass from
its inner layers to its outermost neural layer where they
cause the retinal photoreceptor cells (modified neurons), the rods and cones, to become
hyperpolarized. The photoreceptors then stop releasing neurotransmitters and the bipolar cells (first order neurons) are
no longer inhibited, and fire. The bipolar cells along with the
interneurons, the horizontal and amacrine cells, process,
integrate, and modulate visual input. The bipolar cells relay
this sensory input to the ganglion cells (second order neurons) of the retina. Therefore, stimulation within the retina
proceeds from the rod and cone layer to the bipolar cell layer
and finally to the ganglion cell layer. Although light travels
from the inner to the outer layers of the retina, visual electrical signals are transmitted in the opposite direction from
the outer to the inner layers of the retina.
The ganglion cells possess nonmyelinated axons (see Fig.
16.2b) that course on the inner surface of the retina (separated
from the vitreous body only by the internal limiting membrane), converge at the optic disc, and cross a sieve-like perforated area of the sclera, the lamina cribrosa, to emerge from
the back of the bulb of the eye. At this point, the axons become
myelinated and they form a large bundle, the optic nerve
(CN II). The optic nerve is enveloped in a meningeal cover,
exits the bony orbit by passing through the optic canal, and
enters the middle cranial fossa. The optic nerves of the right
and left sides join superior to the body of the sphenoid bone
in the middle cranial fossa to form an intersection of fibers,
the optic chiasma (G., “optic cross”) (Fig. 16.4) where partial
decussation of the optic nerve fibers (axons) of the two sides
occurs. All ganglion cell axons arising from the temporal half
of the retina course in the lateral aspect of the optic chiasma
without decussating, to join the optic tract of the same side.
All ganglion cell axons arising from the nasal half of the
retina decussate at the optic chiasma, and enter the optic tract
of the opposite side, to join the temporal fibers. Thus, each
optic tract consists of ganglion cell axons arising from both
eyes (the ipsilateral temporal half and the contralateral nasal
half of the retina). The fibers retain a retinotopic organization
in the optic tract as it courses around the cerebral peduncle to
end and relay visual information primarily in the lateral
geniculate nucleus (LGN) of the thalamus, which processes
visual input. The optic nerve also ends and relays visual
information in: (i) the superior colliculus, a mesencephalic
relay nucleus for vision having an important function in
somatic motor reflexes; (ii) the pretectal area, which mediates
autonomic reflexes such as the control of pupillary constriction and lens accommodation (see discussion on visual
reflexes below); and (iii) the hypothalamus, which has an
important function in circadian rhythms (day–night) and the
reproductive cycle (Fig. 16.5).
An overview of the central visual pathway is given in
(Fig. 16.6).
The lateral geniculate
nucleus (Fig. 16.7) is a relay
station of the dorsal thalamus
whose principal function is
to process and regulate the
flow of visual information
and relay it to the primary
visual cortex. The LGN houses the cell bodies of third
order neurons of the visual pathway. Their axons form the
thalamocortical projection (optic radiation) that relays visual
input to the primary visual cortex. The LGN is a laminated
structure consisting of six distinct layers that are readily
identifiable in a horizontal section. Although each LGN
receives information from the contralateral visual hemifield,
each of its layers receives input from only one eye. Layers 1,
4, and 6 receive ganglion cell axons arising from the contralateral retina, whereas layers 2, 3, and 5 receive ganglion cell
axons arising from the ipsilateral retina. Layers 1 and 2
consist of large neurons and are therefore referred to as the
magnocellular layers; they receive information from ganglion cells that are sensitive to movement and contrast but are
insensitive to color. Layers 3–6 consist of small neurons
and are referred to as the parvocellular layers; they receive
information from the ganglion cells responding to color and
form. The macular area of the retina has a greater representation in the LGN than the peripheral (paramacular) areas of
the retina. Furthermore, the lateral half of the LGN receives
visual information from the lower retinal quadrants (upper
visual field quadrants), whereas its medial half receives visual
information from the upper retinal quadrants (lower visual
field quadrants).
In addition to the retinal ganglion cell axon terminals
(second order neurons) arriving at the LGN (retinogeniculate projections), the LGN also receives a greater number of
afferents from the visual cortical areas (corticogeniculate
projections). These fibers are associated with stimulating
visual attention of the individual, and reciprocally regulating
the transmission of sensory input from the LGN to the primary visual cortex.
The superior colliculi (L.
colliculus, “little hill”) (Fig.
16.5) are two prominent
elevations projecting from
the posterior surface of the
mesencephalon. They are also laminated structures, each
consisting of seven layers. The superior colliculus is a relay
nucleus of the mesencephalon that receives sensory input
(afferents) from:
• the visual system to layers 1–3 (from the retina via retinotectal fibers, and from the visual cortex via corticotectal
fibers);
• the auditory system to layers 4–7 (principally from the
inferior colliculus); and
• the somatosensory system to layers 4–7 (spinotectal
tract).
Following the integration of all the sensory input, appropriate reflex responses are produced by the neurons of the
superior colliculi.
The superior colliculus has important functions in the
control of reflex movements that orient the eyes, head, and
neck in response to visual, auditory, and somatic stimuli
(tracking moving objects) via its outputs (efferent projections). Efferents from the superior colliculus include
projections to the reticular formation, the inferior colliculus,
the LGN and the pulvinar of the thalamus, the oculomotor,
trochlear, and abducens nuclei via the medial longitudinal
fasciculus (MLF), the pontine nuclei and the cerebellum via
he tectopontocerebellar tract, and the cervical levels of the
spinal cord via the crossed tectospinal tract.
The fibers of the geniculocalcarine tract follow the contour of the lateral wall of the
lateral ventricle (Fig. 16.8),
joining the retrolenticular
and sublenticular components of the internal capsule,
the corona radiata, and then pass posteriorly toward the
medial and posterior surface of the occipital lobe where the
visual cortex is located. Each one of the axons of the geniculocalcarine tract carries visual input only from one eye.
The geniculocalcarine tract fibers maintain retinotopic
organization and form an upper, an intermediate, and a
lower division. The upper division consists of fibers conveying information from the superior retinal quadrants. This
division projects via the retrolenticular portion of the internal
capsule to the superior bank of the calcarine fissure of the
primary visual cortex. The lower division consists of fibers
conveying information from the inferior retinal quadrants.
The lower division fibers collectively form Meyer’s loop
(Fig. 16.8). These fibers loop anteriorly and inferiorly around
the anterior horn of the lateral ventricle then posteriorly via
the sublenticular part of the internal capsule to the inferior
bank of the calcarine fissure of the primary visual cortex. The
intermediate division of the geniculocalcarine tract consists
of fibers relaying visual information to the primary visual
cortex from the macular region of the retina (Table 16.1).
The neurons of the visual
cortex respond to different
visual stimuli transmitted by
neurons conveying color,
motion, three-dimensional vision, or a combination of various visual stimuli. The LGN projects visual information to
the primary visual cortex (V-1) (Fig. 16.9). The primary visual
cortex projects to the secondary visual cortex (V-2), where
information is processed and subsequently relayed to the
tertiary visual areas (V-3, V-4, and the middle temporal area)
of the cortex. The tertiary visual areas function in identifying
an object as well as in determining its location and color.
Furthermore, the middle temporal area has an important
function in detecting moving objects.
The primary visual cortex resides mainly in the medial
surfaces of the occipital lobes on the banks of the calcarine
fissure, although it extends into their posteromedial surface.
The primary visual cortex is also referred to as the striate
cortex due to its striped characteristic exhibiting a noticeable
band of myelinated fibers, the “stripe of Gennari.”
The primary visual cortex receives visual input from
the macula of the retina in its caudal third, and from the
paramacular (and more peripheral) fields of the retina in its
rostral portions. The macular representation in the primary
visual cortex is much larger than that of other areas of the
retina, reflecting the high visual acuity of the macula.
Inherent in the structure of
the visual system is its ability
to adapt to environmental
changes such as varying
light intensity, in order to
protect the eye and to facilitate vision. The pupillary light
reflex is an autonomic response; it is mediated independently
of cortical input.
The iris contains two smooth muscles, the sphincter pupillae and dilatator pupillae, which control the diameter of the
pupil. When the circularly arranged fibers of the sphincter
pupillae contract the diameter of the pupil is decreased,
therefore reducing the amount of light that falls on the retina.
The fibers of the dilatator pupillae muscle are arranged radially, and when they contract the pupillary aperture dilates,
allowing more light to enter the eye to reach the retina. The
size of the pupillary aperture depends on two factors: (i)
the tone of the autonomic nervous system—if the activity of
the sympathetic nervous system dominates, the pupillary
aperture dilates; if the activity of the parasympathetic nervous
system dominates, the pupillary aperture constricts; and (ii)
the amount of light that reaches the retina—varying the light
intensity results in a corresponding alteration of pupillary
size. Normally, bright light causes the pupils to constrict,
whereas dim light causes the pupils to dilate.
The pupillary light reflex of an individual may be tested
by illuminating one eye with a small flashlight and observing
that normally, simultaneous pupillary constriction results in
both eyes. The reaction in the illuminated eye is the direct
pupillary light reflex, whereas the reaction in the nonilluminated eye is the consensual pupillary light reflex.
The pupillary light reflex pathway is summarized in
Fig. 16.10.
Bright light stimulating the photosensitive retina is transmitted via the optic nerve, optic chiasma, optic tract and 
the brachium of the superior colliculus (without synapsing
at the LGN) to the pretectal area located in the cranial aspect
of the mesencephalon (Fig. 16.11). The pretectal area sends
bilateral projections to the Edinger–Westphal nuclei of the
oculomotor nuclear complex.
Each Edinger–Westphal nucleus (containing preganglionic
parasympathetic neurons) (Fig. 16.11) projects via the
oculomotor nerve to the ipsilateral ciliary ganglion (a
parasympathetic ganglion of the oculomotor nerve) synapsing with postganglionic parasympathetic neurons housed
in this ganglion. The postganglionic parasympathetic fibers
project via the short ciliary branches of the trigeminal nerve
to the ipsilateral sphincter pupillae muscle, causing it to
contract. This results in bilateral pupillary constriction, with a
consequent reduction in the amount of light reaching the
retina of both eyes.
Pupillary dilation is mediated by the sympathetic
division of the autonomic
nervous system. Pupillary
dilation occurs when sympathetic activity is dominant, such as when the individual is
experiencing pain, fear, or rage.
Neurons of the posterior aspect of the hypothalamus
project to the ciliospinal center of the spinal cord located in
the intermediolateral cell column of cord levels (C8) T1–T2
(Fig. 16.12). Here they synapse with preganglionic sympathetic neurons. Preganglionic sympathetic fibers exit the
spinal cord, enter the sympathetic trunk and ascend to the
superior cervical ganglion where they synapse with postganglionic sympathetic neurons. Postganglionic sympathetic
fibers form the internal carotid arterial perivascular plexus
and follow vessel branches to the orbit where they join the
long and short ciliary branches of the trigeminal nerve and
terminate in the dilatator pupillae muscle. Sympathetic
innervation of this muscle causes it to contract, increasing the
pupillary diameter, resulting in mydriasis (Fig. 16.13).
As visual attention is consciously switched from a
far away object to one near
by, the thickness of the lens
of each eye changes from a
flatter to a more rounded, biconvex shape in order to be able
to project a focused image on the retina. This is accomplished
by an initial conscious fixation on the near object, followed
by the subconscious convergence accommodation reflex,
consisting of three reflex changes (Fig. 16.14).
1 Convergence. As attention is shifted from a far to a near
object, both eyes converge simultaneously. This is mediated by bilateral contraction of the medial recti muscles,
which are innervated by the medial rectus subnucleus of
the oculomotor nerve (CN III). This convergence permits
the visual image to be projected and focused on the foveae
of both retinas. If this is not accomplished, the individual
will experience diplopia (double vision). Unlike other
reflexes, this reflex involves the cerebral cortex.
2 Accommodation. Parasympathetic stimulation causes
contraction of the ciliary muscle of the iris thus releasing
the tension it exerts on the suspensory ligaments of
the lens. Since the lens is no longer being stretched, it
thickens (lens accommodation), focusing the image on
the retina.
3 Pupillary constriction. Pupillary constriction enhances
the outline of the image formed on the retina. This is a distinct and independent process from that which occurs in
the pupillary light reflex.
Visual input is transmitted from the retina to the primary
visual cortex (Brodmann’s area 17) via the visual pathway. The
primary visual cortex transmits the information to the visual
association cortex (Brodmann’s area 19) where reflex activity
is initiated. Fibers from this area form the corticotectal tract
(the afferent limb of reflex), which projects bilaterally to the
superior colliculus and/or the pretectal area. These areas
then project to Perlia’s nucleus of the oculomotor nuclear
complex, which in turn project to the Edinger–Westphal
nucleus and the medial rectus subnucleus (also of the
oculomotor nuclear complex). Motor fibers from the medial
rectus subnucleus and preganglionic parasympathetic fibers
from the Edinger–Westphal nucleus join the oculomotor
nerve (the efferent limb of reflex) to distribute to the medial
rectus muscle and the ciliary ganglion, respectively. The
medial recti muscles adduct the eyes (convergence). Postganglionic parasympathetic fibers arising from the ciliary
ganglion join the short ciliary nerves of the ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve to distribute to the sphincter
pupillae muscle and to the ciliary muscle. Contraction of the
sphincter pupillae muscle results in pupillary constriction
(miosis), whereas contraction of the ciliary muscle results in
thickening of the lens (accommodation) (Fig. 16.15).
The corneal blink reflex
consists of (Fig. 16.16):
• receptors (at the peripheral terminals of pseudounipolar neurons in
the ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve);
• an afferent limb (peripheral processes of pseudounipolar
neurons in the ophthalmic division of the trigeminal
nerve);
• an integrator (spinal nucleus and main sensory nucleus
of the trigeminal nerve);
• an efferent limb (facial nerve branches to the orbicularis
oculi muscle); and
• an effector (orbicularis oculi muscle).
When a fine strand of cotton or any other foreign object is
brushed against the cornea unilaterally, it evokes an immediate, forceful blinking of both eyes simultaneously. General
somatic afferent (GSA) sensation from the cornea is transmitted by the receptors at the peripheral processes of first order
pseudounipolar neurons whose cell bodies are housed in
the trigeminal ganglion. These peripheral processes course
in the ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve (afferent
limb). The central processes of most of these neurons enter
the pons, join the ipsilateral spinal trigeminal tract and
descend to terminate in the rostral two-thirds of the ipsilateral spinal trigeminal nucleus where they synapse with
second order neurons (interneurons). The remainder of the
first order neurons terminate in the ipsilateral main sensory
nucleus of the trigeminal nerve. Second order neurons from
the spinal trigeminal nucleus as well as from the main
sensory nucleus project bilaterally to the motor nucleus of
the facial nerve where they synapse with motoneurons
(third order neurons). Fibers of the motoneurons course in
the facial nerve to terminate in and innervate the orbicularis
oculi muscle, causing bilateral blinking (Fig. 16.17).
The visual field, the region perceived by each eye, is divided by imaginary
lines into quadrants (Fig. 16.18). Since light rays travel in straight lines, the
temporal half of the visual field is projected onto the nasal half of the retina,
whereas the nasal half of the visual field is projected onto the temporal half of
the retina. The image within the visual field quadrants is reversed and inverted
by the lens when it is projected on the respective retina.
The naming of visual deficits is based on the visual field loss and not the
actual impaired or damaged region of the retina or other visual system component (Table 16.2).
Anopsia (anopia) (G., “loss of vision”) refers to visual field loss.
Hemianopsia (G. hemi, “half”) is the loss of only one-half (temporal or nasal)
of the visual field of one or both eyes (Fig. 16.18B). Quadrantanopsia
(L. quadr, “one-fourth”) is the loss of one-fourth (upper temporal or lower
temporal; upper nasal or lower nasal) of the visual field of one or both eyes.
A deficit may be homonymous (G. homo, “same”) or heteronymous (G.
hetero, “different”) (Fig. 16.18B). In a homonymous deficit, the visual field
losses for the two eyes are the same. That is, there is a right or left visual field
loss for both eyes. In a heteronymous deficit, the visual field losses for the
two eyes are not alike. That is, there is a right visual field loss in one eye, and a
left visual field loss in the contralateral eye, or vice versa.
A unilateral lesion of the optic nerve results in permanent blindness in
the ipsilateral (corresponding) eye (A in Fig. 16.19).
Unilateral damage to the temporal (noncrossing) fibers of the optic
chiasma results in an ipsilateral nasal hemianopsia (B1 in Fig. 16.19). The
noncrossing fibers are often damaged by an aneurysm and/or calcification
of the internal carotid artery due to its close proximity to the fibers. Bilateral
damage to the temporal fibers of the optic chiasma results in a binasal
heteronymous hemianopsia (B2 in Fig. 16.19).
A lesion that damages the crossed fibers occupying the central region of
the optic chiasma results in a bitemporal heteronymous (nonhomonymous) hemianopsia (“tunnel vision”) (C in Fig. 16.19). The central fibers may
be damaged due to compression by a tumor of the pituitary gland.
A unilateral lesion caudal to the optic chiasma, affecting the optic tract
fibers or the lateral geniculate nucleus, results in a contralateral homonymous hemianopsia (D in Fig. 16.19).
A unilateral lesion affecting Myer’s loop or the lower division of
the optic radiations, results in a contralateral upper homonymous
quadrantanopsia (E in Fig. 16.19). A lesion affecting the fibers of the upper
division of the geniculocalcarine tract (optic radiations) results in a contralateral lower homonymous quadrantanopia (F in Fig. 16.19).
A unilateral lesion that damages the upper and lower divisions of the
geniculocalcarine tract or produces injury to the ipsilateral primary visual
cortex (area 17) will result in a contralateral homonymous hemianopsia
with macular sparing (G in Fig. 16.19). Macular sparing occurs because so
much cortex is devoted to the macula that often some central vision is spared.
If one of the optic nerves (afferent limb of the pupillary light reflex arc) is
damaged, and light is flashed into the eye ipsilateral to the damaged nerve,
both direct and consensual pupillary responses will not be present since
sensory input is not transmitted centrally. When the light is flashed into the eye
on the side of the undamaged optic nerve, both the direct and the consensual
pupillary responses will be elicited, if both oculomotor nerves are functional.
If the optic nerve is functional bilaterally, but there is unilateral damage to
the oculomotor nerve (efferent limb of the pupillary light reflex arc), light
flashed into either eye is perceived by the individual and sensory input is transmitted centrally. When light is flashed into the eye ipsilateral to the oculomotor
nerve lesion there is only a consensual pupillary response. When light is flashed
into the eye contralateral to the oculomotor nerve lesion, there is only a direct
pupillary response. If both oculomotor nerves are damaged and parasympathetic innervation to the sphincter pupillae muscles is interrupted bilaterally,
then neither eye will exhibit the direct or consensual responses.
An individual may be blind, but present a normal pupillary light reflex (see
Fig. 16.11). This indicates that the site of the lesion producing the blindness
involves structures caudal (posterior) to the divergence of the optic tract fibers
(destined for the Edinger–Westphal nucleus and/or the pretectal area, which is
associated with the pupillary reflex). The lesion may involve the LGN, or the
optic radiations, or the primary visual cortex. If the individual is completely
blind, a bilateral lesion of the visual cortex is more probable since an extensive,
bilateral lesion of the geniculocalcarine tract is incompatible with life.
A lesion that damages the sympathetic (preganglionic or postganglionic) fibers
of this pathway, results in Horner’s syndrome ipsilateral to the lesion. One of
the characteristics of this syndrome is a persistent miosis (pupillary constriction) ipsilateral to the lesion due to the unopposed action of the parasympathetic nervous system. Although an individual with Horner’s syndrome
exhibits loss of the pupillary dilation reflex, the pupillary constriction reflex
is intact, both ipsilateral and contralateral to the lesion.
If there is a lesion in the ophthalmic nerve (afferent limb) of the corneal blink
reflex arc, corneal sensation is lost on the ipsilateral side, and the corneal blink
reflex is not elicited on either side upon stimulation of the cornea ipsilateral to
the lesion. If the cornea ipsilateral to the intact ophthalmic nerve is stimulated,
it evokes bilateral simultaneous blinking.
If the ophthalmic nerve (afferent limb) of the corneal blink reflex arc is
intact bilaterally, but there is a unilateral lesion of the facial nerve (efferent
limb), both corneas can sense stimulation when either one is stimulated.
However, only the eye ipsilateral to the intact facial nerve will blink.
This patient has optic neuritis.
This refers to inflammation of
the optic nerve arising from any cause.
However, it most commonly occurs in
multiple sclerosis (MS) or another
demyelinating disease. Not all patients
with optic neuritis have or will ever
develop MS, but most do. Therefore optic
neuritis typically refers to demyelination
of the optic nerves. MS affects only the
central nervous system. Although almost
all of the cranial nerves are components of
the peripheral nervous system, the optic
nerves are unusual since they are actually
tracts and thus components of the central
nervous system.
This case is a typical presentation of
optic neuritis, i.e., visual loss affecting one
eye (occasionally both) and sometimes
with pain on eye movement and
papilledema. Papilledema refers to
swelling of the optic disc as seen on
ophthalmoscopic exam. This may or may
not be present, depending on the part of
the optic nerve that is affected. If visual
acuity is severely impaired then the pupil
of the affected eye will not constrict
to light properly, i.e., less than the
unaffected eye. This can result in a
Marcus Gunn pupil, as determined in the
swinging light test. The examiner shines
a penlight into each eye in succession.
When the light is directed in the normal
eye, both pupils constrict. When it is
swung to the affected eye, the pupil
paradoxically dilates (this is enhanced by
the fact that it had been constricted just
prior). This is referred to as an afferent
pupillary defect in the affected eye.
Optic neuritis is treated by
intravenous corticosteroids over 3–5
days. The majority of cases resolve
completely or nearly so over the course
of weeks or months. An MRI of the optic
nerves may reveal the inflammation.
However, an MRI is used mainly in the
detection of any other brain lesion that
may be indicative of MS. Visually evoked
potentials can also be used to detect
subclinical abnormality of the optic
nerves to confirm the presence of MS in
suspected cases.
A 49-year-old woman complains of right-sided hearing loss
which began a year ago. This has slowly
and progressively become worse. Hearing from the left ear is normal. She first
noticed this when it became difficult to
hear with the phone held to her right ear.
She has also noted vague and persistent
imbalance and dizziness over the past
couple months. There is some ringing in
her right ear. The patient has no other
complaints.
Examination reveals mild hearing loss
and difficulty distinguishing different
sounds on the right. The appearance of
the external auditory canal and eardrum
is normal. Gait examination reveals mild
ataxia when attempting to walk in a
straight line. The rest of the neurologic
exam is normal.
The special sense of hearing is mediated by the cochlear
nerve, the cochlear division of the vestibulocochlear nerve
(CN VIII), that innervates a specialized receptor organ, the
organ of Corti enclosed in the cochlea (G. cochlos, “snail
shell”), a bony structure located in the inner ear within the
petrous portion of the temporal bone (Fig. 17.1). Originally,
the principal function of the inner ear was the maintenance
of equilibrium (balance), but the phylogenetically older vestibular apparatus (for balance) developed a special receptor for
sound perception.
The ear is divisible into three parts: the outer ear, the middle
ear, and the inner ear, each performing a necessary function
for the perception of sound (Fig. 17.1; Table 17.1).
The outer ear is comprised
of the cartilaginous auricle
(pinna) and the external
auditory meatus (canal),
both of which serve to
facilitate the reception of sound waves conducted by the
air by funneling them towards the tympanic membrane
(eardrum) located at the internal extent of the meatus. The
contour of the helical-shaped auricle alters the frequency
spectrum of sound depending on the position of the listener
in reference to the location of the sound source. The tympanic
membrane resembles a resilient trampoline that oscillates
in response to incoming sound waves. Moreover, it forms a
partition and seals off the external auditory meatus from the
middle ear cavity.
The middle ear, also referred
to as the tympanic cavity,
consists of an irregularshaped air-filled chamber,
embedded in the petrous
portion of the temporal bone. It contains several important
elements:
1 Three small articulating bones: the auditory ossicles (the
malleus, the incus, and the stapes).
2 Two miniature skeletal muscles: the tensor tympani
muscle, which attaches to the malleus, and the stapedius
muscle, which attaches to the stapes.
3 Two membrane-covered foramina in the bone: the oval
window and the round window.
4 Two additional openings: the Eustachian (pharyngeal,
auditory) tube, which permits communication between
the middle ear and nasopharynx, and the communication
to the mastoid air cells.
5 The chorda tympani nerve: a branch of the facial nerve
(CN VII), which passes through but has no function in the
middle ear.
The middle ear functions in the transmission and transduction of tympanic membrane vibrations to the inner ear (from
an air to a fluid medium) (Fig. 17.2). The oval window and
the round window both serve necessary functions in these
processes.
The ossicles are linked in series by synovial joints and are
suspended within the tympanic cavity. Since they extend
from the tympanic membrane to the membrane of the oval
window, they conduct oscillations from the tympanic membrane to the membrane of the oval window. The intensity of
these vibrations is dampened by the tensor tympani and the
stapedius muscles. When the tensor tympani contracts, it
tenses the tympanic membrane by pulling on the malleus,
therefore reducing the vibrations transmitted from this membrane to the ossicles. When the stapedius contracts, it pulls on
and stabilizes the stapes, therefore reducing the vibrations
that are transmitted by the footplate of the stapes to the oval
window of the membranous labyrinth of the inner ear, and
eventually to the auditory receptors. By dampening vibrations, they serve a protective reflex function for the auditory
apparatus.
The Eustachian tube (also referred to as the pharyngeal or
auditory tube) serves to equalize the atmospheric pressure
between the middle and outer ear. At higher elevations, the
atmospheric pressure in the external auditory meatus is
lower than that of the middle ear cavity and causes the tympanic membrane to curve outwards (towards the external
auditory meatus) stimulating pain receptors of the tympanic
membrane. Since the wall of the Eustachian tube is normally
collapsed, pressure differences can be relieved by the action
of swallowing, chewing, yawning, or coughing, which open
the Eustachian tube, allowing equalization of pressure on the
two sides of the tympanic membrane.
The fluid-filled inner ear is
embedded in the petrous
portion of the temporal
bone. It consists of a bony
(osseous) labyrinth (G.,
“maze”) and a membranous
labyrinth forming an interconnected system of channels and chambers that are filled
with fluid. The bony labyrinth is divided into three regions:
the vestibule, the three semicircular canals, and the cochlea
(Fig. 17.3). The vestibule and the semicircular canals are
associated with the maintenance of equilibrium and are
discussed in Chapter 18. The membranous labyrinth fits
inside and is supported by the bony labyrinth and follows its
general contour.
The cochlea is a spiral, bony shell, resembling a snail shell
(Figs 17.1–17.3), which winds 2.5–2.75 turns about its osseous
axis, the modiolus. Bubble-like hollow areas dispersed
within the modiolus house groups of nerve cell bodies of the
bipolar sensory neurons that collectively form the cochlear
(spiral) ganglion. The peripheral processes of these bipolar
neurons terminate in the basal aspect of the hair cells of the
organ of Corti, the cochlear receptor for hearing, whereas
the central processes of these neurons form the root of the
cochlear nerve.
The cochlea’s interior is divided into three parallel,
fluid-filled, compartments by two membranes, the vestibular
(Reissner’s) membrane and the basilar membrane. Each compartment is referred to as a scala (L., “staircase”) since each
spirals about the modiolus like a winding staircase. They are:
the (bony) scala vestibuli (L., “staircase of the vestibule”); the
(membranous) scala media (cochlear duct) (L., “staircase of
the cochlear duct”), which is wedged between the vestibular
and the basilar membranes (as a blind-ending duct ending
at the apex of the cochlea); and the (bony) scala tympani
(L., “stairway of the tympanic cavity”) (Fig. 17.3B). The interior
of the scala vestibuli and scala tympani is lined by a simple
squamous epithelium.
The perilymph-filled, bony, scala vestibuli of the cochlea
is in direct communication with the perilymph-filled, bony,
vestibule of the vestibular apparatus. The scala vestibuli and
scala tympani, both of which are filled with perilymph, are
joined at the helicotrema (G. helicon, “helix;” trema, “hole”),
a small connecting aperture located at the apex of the cochlea,
which permits perilymph from the scala vestibuli to flow into
the scala tympani. These canals are connected to the subarachnoid space via the endolymphatic duct, and the perilymph flows into the subarachnoid space thus contributing
to the cerebrospinal fluid. It should also be noted that the
scala vestibuli communicates with the oval window and the
scala tympani communicates with the round window.
The cochlear duct, also referred to as the scala media,
contains endolymph. On cross-section of the cochlea, the
triangular-shaped cochlear duct is wedged between the
scala vestibuli and the scala tympani with its apex attached to
the spiral lamina of the modiolus. The vestibular (Reissner’s)
membrane, the roof of the cochlear duct, serves as a division
between the cochlear duct and the scala vestibuli. This
membrane consists of squamous epithelium. Its function is
unclear; however it is believed to play a role in the transmission of vibrations from the perilymph of the scala vestibuli to
the endolymph of the cochlear duct. The floor of the cochlear
duct, which separates it from the scala tympani, is the basilar
membrane. The basilar membrane is an elastic structure
exhibiting a gradual increase in width, and a decrease in
stiffness from the oval window (at the cochlear base) to the
helicotrema (at the cochlear apex). The gradual decrease in
stiffness permits this membrane to be sensitive to high frequency vibrations near the cochlear base, and low frequency
vibrations near its apex, at the helicotrema. Thus, the vestibular membrane is interposed between the scala vestibuli and
the cochlear duct, whereas the basilar membrane is interposed between the cochlear duct and the scala tympani. The
inner surface of the bony labyrinth bordering the scala media
is the stria vascularis, which produces endolymph.
The receptors associated with the sense of hearing form a
structure, the (spiral) organ of Corti, which rests like a carpet
along the floor of the cochlear duct on the basilar membrane.
The organ of Corti consists of supporting epithelial cells and
neuroepithelial receptor “hair cells.” Each hair cell displays
numerous stereocilia (long microvilli) and a single kinocilium projecting from its apical cell surface. The free ends of
the stereocilia project into the tectorial membrane, an acellular, gelatinous substance, joined to the osseous spiral lamina
(a bony shelf protruding from the modiolus). The hair cells
are the receptors of the auditory system that act as transducers, that is, they serve to convert mechanical energy into
electrical energy that can be relayed to the brainstem. Hair
cells synapse with the peripheral ends (dendritic processes)
of the bipolar neurons whose cell bodies are housed in
the spiral ganglion. The central processes of these bipolar
neurons form the cochlear nerve, which joins the vestibular
nerve to form the vestibulocochlear nerve (CN VIII). This
nerve courses through the internal acoustic meatus to enter
the cranial vault, and then enters the brainstem at the
pontomedullary angle.
The auricle and external
auditory meatus channel
sound waves to the tympanic membrane, which
cause it to vibrate (see
Fig. 17.2). Oscillations of the
tympanic membrane cause the three ossicles to vibrate in
sequence, conducting the vibration to the oval window. The
articulating ossicles form a lever system, and not only mediate vibrations from the tympanic membrane to the membrane
of the oval window, but—a fact of paramount importance—
amplify these vibrations as they are converted from air waves
of the outer ear into fluid waves (perilymph) of the inner ear.
Since liquids are more resistant to the conduction of sound
waves, the incoming sound waves hitting the tympanic
membrane have to be amplified by the ossicles in order to
ensure adequate vibration of the perilymph. Since the
tympanic membrane is much larger than the oval window
membrane, and the sound waves reaching the oval window
membrane are amplified by the ossicles, the compound effect
is that the vibrations reaching the oval window have been
amplified approximately 20-fold from the original vibrations
at the tympanic membrane. The rapid oscillations of the
stapes footplate cause the membrane covering the oval window to vibrate, which in turn agitates the perilymph fluid of
the vestibule, causing fluid displacement and the formation
of pressure waves. The pressure waves are propagated from
the base of the cochlea, through the scala vestibuli, along the
helical path to the apex of the cochlea. Although perilymph
waves in the scala vestibuli also flow via the helicotrema to
the scala tympani, the effect of these waves is probably minor
and causes little stimulation of the organ of Corti.
Perilymph waves in the scala vestibuli agitate the vestibular membrane, which begins to oscillate. The oscillating
vestibular membrane generates waves in the endolymph of
the cochlear duct, which in turn causes the basilar membrane to oscillate. Basilar membrane oscillations are initiated
at the base of the cochlea and advance along the basilar membrane as a traveling wave towards the apex of the cochlea.
Wave formation in the scala vestibuli and scala tympani is
possible only because of the flexibility of the elastic membrane covering the round window, which vibrates and
allows pressure formed by the waves to be released into the
middle ear cavity, as the round window membrane protrudes towards it. Without the round window to compensate
for the pressure exerted on the oval window, waves could
not be propagated in the scala tympani since fluid completely enclosed in a bony compartment is resistant to
compression.
The bases of the hair receptor cells rest on the basilar
membrane, whereas the tips of their cilia and stereocilia
extend into the overlying tectorial membrane. It is the basilar
membrane oscillations that cause a shearing force and
deformation of the hair cells’ cilia and stereocilia, which are
inserted (fixed) in the less mobile overlying tectorial membrane (Fig. 17.3C). This deformation causes depolarization
of the cell membrane, and stimulation of the hair cells is
transmitted to the dendritic processes of the bipolar sensory
neurons. Sensory stimulation is then relayed by the cochlear
nerve to the cochlear nuclei in the brainstem (Fig. 17.4).
The pathway of auditory stimulation is summarized in
(Fig. 17.5).
Auditory input travels in the
auditory pathway, which
begins with the first order
neurons housed in the spiral
(cochlear) ganglion and continues as a chain of multisynaptic relays into the medulla, pons, mesencephalon,
diencephalon (thalamus), and finally the cerebral cortex. Due
to the complexity of the auditory pathways, only the main
pathways are discussed here. The auditory pathway transmits sensory input related to frequency (pitch), amplitude
(loudness), and location of the sound.
The auditory pathway relays sensory input by projecting
bilaterally in the brain; that is, auditory input from each ear
(similar to visual input from each eye) ultimately flows to
both cerebral hemispheres. The only site of unilateral (ipsilateral) projection in the auditory pathway is the first relay,
since each cochlear nerve projects to its ipsilateral cochlear
nuclei. All subsequent relays of the auditory pathway are
bilateral.
The spiral (cochlear) ganglion is unusual since its nerve
cell bodies are not aggregated into a single ganglion. Instead,
the cell bodies form numerous swellings that are embedded
n hollow bubbles within the modiolus of the cochlea. The
dendritic terminals of the peripheral processes of these
neurons terminate in the organ of Corti and synapse with its
specialized “hair cell” receptors. The central processes of
these neurons collect to form the cochlear nerve (the cochlear
division of the vestibulocochlear nerve, CN VIII). In the inner
ear, the cochlear nerve joins the vestibular nerve to form the
vestibulocochlear nerve. From the inner ear, the vestibulocochlear nerve then passes through the internal acoustic
meatus to enter the posterior cranial fossa of the cranial vault.
As it enters the brainstem at the pontomedullary angle, the
vestibulocochlear nerve again separates into its two components, the vestibular nerve and the cochlear nerve. The
vestibular nerve terminates in the vestibular nuclei, whereas
the cochlear nerve terminates in the cochlear nuclei. The
vestibular and cochlear nuclei extend into the pons and the
medulla. The central processes of the first order neurons of
the cochlear nerve enter the ventral cochlear nucleus where
they bifurcate, some branches terminating in the dorsal cochlear
nucleus, with others terminating in the ventral cochlear
nucleus. Thus, the ventral cochlear nucleus as well as the
(smaller) dorsal cochlear nucleus are the first relay stations
of auditory input. The ventral cochlear nucleus is subdivided
into a posteroventral cochlear nucleus and an anteroventral
cochlear nucleus. The anteroventral cochlear nucleus is the
major nucleus of termination of cochlear nerve fibers.
Second order fibers arising from the cochlear nuclei either
ascend ipsilaterally from the anteroventral cochlear nucleus
to the medial and lateral superior olivary nuclei, or decussate
forming three different separate pathways: the dorsal, intermediate, and ventral acoustic striae (see Fig. 17.4). Most of
the decussating fibers arising from the anteroventral cochlear
nucleus form a very noticeable group of fibers, the trapezoid
body, also known as the ventral acoustic striae in the ventral
pontine tegmentum. The fibers in the trapezoid body project
to and terminate contralaterally either in:
• the medial nucleus of the trapezoid body, which in turn
projects to the lateral superior olivary nucleus;
• the medial superior olivary nucleus; or
• the dorsal nucleus of the lateral lemniscus and the
inferior colliculus (by ascending in the contralateral
lateral lemniscus) (Fig. 17.6).
Second order fibers arising from the posteroventral
cochlear nucleus form the intermediate acoustic stria
ventral to the medial longitudinal fasciculus. These fibers
subsequently join the ipsilateral and contralateral lateral lemniscus to ascend to, and terminate in, the ventral nucleus of
the lateral lemniscus and the inferior colliculus, bilaterally
(Fig. 17.7).
Second order fibers arising from the dorsal cochlear
nucleus form the dorsal acoustic stria, which decussates on
the ventral aspect of the floor of the fourth ventricle. These
fibers join the contralateral lateral lemniscus to ascend to, and
terminate in, the inferior colliculus.
The superior olivary nuclei
form a nuclear complex
housing third order neurons, located in the pontine
tegmentum at the level of the
facial nucleus. The main nuclei of this complex are the medial
superior olivary nucleus and the lateral superior olivary
nucleus, both of which receive second order fiber terminals
from the cochlear nuclei (as discussed above), and have an
important function in sound localization. The superior olivary
nuclei process auditory information from both ears, and
determine the direction and location that a sound is coming
from in the following manner. The medial superior olivary
nucleus processes auditory input by comparing the amount
of time it takes for a sound to reach each ear, whereas the
lateral superior olivary nucleus processes auditory input
by comparing the intensity (volume) of a sound arriving at
each ear. Thus a sound arising from a source, such as a telephone located to one’s right, arrives at the right ear sooner
than it does in the left ear, and the sound is slightly louder
in the right ear than it is in the left ear. If a sound arises
from a source that is located at an equal distance from
both ears, then the sound arrives at both ears at the same
time. The neurons in the lateral superior olivary nucleus are
stimulated by impulses transmitted by second order fibers
arising from the ipsilateral anteroventral cochlear nucleus
and are inhibited by impulses transmitted by second order
fibers arising from the contralateral anteroventral cochlear
nucleus.
The lateral lemniscus is the
main ascending pathway of
the auditory system in the
brainstem, conveying auditory input from both ears. In
summary, the lateral lemniscus (L., “ribbon”) contains the
following.
1 Second order fibers arising from the contralateral
anteroventral cochlear nucleus (which do not synapse in
the superior olivary complex) that terminate in the dorsal
nucleus of the lateral lemniscus and the inferior colliculus.
2 Second order fibers arising from the ipsilateral and
contralateral posteroventral cochlear nucleus that terminate in the ventral nucleus of the lateral lemniscus and
in the inferior colliculus.
3 Second order fibers arising from the contralateral dorsal
cochlear nucleus that terminate in the ventral nucleus of
the lateral lemniscus and in the inferior colliculus.
4 Third order fibers originating from the superior olivary
nuclear complex (the fibers arising from the medial superior olivary nucleus join the ipsilateral lateral lemniscus,
whereas those that arise from the lateral superior olivary
nucleus join the ipsilateral and contralateral lateral lemniscus) that terminate in the dorsal nucleus of the lateral
lemniscus and in the superior colliculus.
5 Fibers arising from the dorsal and ventral nuclei of the
lateral lemniscus that project to the ipsilateral inferior
colliculus.
The ventral nucleus of the
lateral lemniscus contains
neurons that process auditory input from only one ear,
whereas the dorsal nucleus of the lateral lemniscus houses
neurons that process auditory input from both ears.
The inferior colliculus (L.,
“little hill”), located in the
roof of the caudal midbrain,
is a mesencephalic relay nucleus of the auditory system. It
receives afferents ascending in the lateral lemniscus from the
cochlear nuclei, the superior olivary nuclear complex, and
the nuclei of the lateral lemniscus. The inferior colliculus also
receives afferents from the contralateral inferior colliculus
and the auditory cortex.
The inferior colliculus gives rise to a prominent bundle,
the brachium of the inferior colliculus (L. brachium, “arm”),
an arm-like structure whose fibers end in the ipsilateral
medial geniculate nucleus, a thalamic relay station of the
auditory system. The inferior colliculus also projects to the
contralateral medial geniculate nucleus and the superior
colliculus (which is involved in visual reflexes) to mediate
audiovisual reflex activity such as turning the head and eyes
in the direction of a startling noise. The inferior colliculus is
associated with sound localization.
Fibers arising in the medial
geniculate nucleus form
the auditory radiations that
join the sublenticular portion
of the posterior limb of the
internal capsule to terminate
in the primary auditory cortex. The medial geniculate
nucleus processes auditory input related to sound intensity
(loudness) and frequency (pitch), and transmits it to the
auditory cortex.
The primary auditory cortex
receives the auditory radiations from the lateral geniculate nucleus. This cortical
region has a tonotopic representation of frequencies; that
is, neurons responding to low frequencies reside in its rostral
extent, whereas neurons responding to high frequencies
reside in its caudal extent. The primary auditory cortex
is arranged into two-dimensional, alternating, vertically
oriented columns of neurons (Fig. 17.8). One dimension of the
auditory cortex is composed of frequency columns. The cells
in each frequency column respond to an auditory stimulus of
a particular frequency. As mentioned above, cells responding
to low frequencies reside in the frequency columns located in
the rostral extent of the transverse temporal gyri of Heschl,
whereas frequency columns containing cells responding to
gradually higher frequencies are lined up in sequence toward
the caudal extent of the primary auditory cortex. The other
dimension of the auditory cortex is composed of alternating
binaural columns. There are two types of binaural columns:
summation columns and suppression columns. The neurons
residing in the summation columns respond to an auditory stimulus that stimulates both ears simultaneously. In
contrast, the neurons in the suppression columns respond
maximally to an auditory stimulus that stimulates only one
ear, but respond minimally when the auditory stimulus
stimulates both ears.
The primary auditory cortex of each side sends projections
to the contralateral side via the corpus callosum. The primary
auditory cortex plays an important function in the detection
of alteration in pattern as well as the localization of a sound.
The secondary auditory cortical areas, although numerous, are not well defined. They border the primary auditory
cortex and form reciprocal connections with the primary
auditory cortex. The secondary auditory cortical areas play
an important function in the interpretation of sounds, and via
connections with Wernicke’s area function in the comprehension of language.
The superior olivary
nucleus, one of the nuclei
of the olivary nuclear complex, gives rise to the olivocochlear bundle (an efferent pathway) whose fibers descend
both ipsilaterally and contralaterally to terminate in the spiral
organ of Corti, where they synapse with receptor hair cells
(Fig. 17.9). This tract has an inhibitory effect on cochlear nerve
activity, modulating and sharpening auditory transmission.
Thus the cochlea is innervated by the peripheral (afferent)
processes of the first order bipolar neurons of the cochlear
nerve, as well as the olivocochlear (efferent) fibers arising
from the brainstem.
A loud noise heard in one ear
causes a reflex contraction
of both the tensor tympani
and the stapedius muscles
of both ears, and therefore
dampen, bilaterally, the transmission of excessively loud
and/or startling sound wave signals from the outer
to the inner ear. The sound waves entering one ear follow the
normal auditory pathway via the cochlear nerve to the
ipsilateral ventral cochlear nucleus. Each ventral cochlear
nucleus projects bilaterally to the superior olivary nuclei.
They in turn project bilaterally to the facial motor nuclei and
the motor nuclei of the trigeminal nerve. Each facial motor
nucleus projects to the ipsilateral stapedius muscle. Each
motor nucleus of the trigeminal nerve projects to the
ipsilateral tensor tympani muscle (Fig. 17.10).
Hearing defects can result from many causes. A unilateral lesion in the facial
nerve (CN VII) proximal to giving rise to the branch to the stapedius muscle
results in hyperacusis, characterized by abnormally acute hearing in the
affected ear. This condition often occurs in individuals with Bell’s palsy.
Hearing defects may be categorized into conduction deafness and sensorineural (nerve or perceptive) deafness.
Conduction deafness usually involves the auditory apparatus of the
outer and/or middle ear and is caused by a defect in the mechanical transmission of sound from the air-filled outer and/or middle ear to the fluid-filled
inner ear, which interferes with sound conduction. Conduction deafness may
result from:
1 Cerumen (wax) buildup in the external auditory canal.
2 Perforation of the tympanic membrane.
3 Otitis media, which is a middle ear inflammation and is accompanied by
fluid accumulation in the middle ear chamber (which if not treated may
progress to meningitis or brain abscesses).
4 Otosclerosis (G. oto, “ear;” sklerosis, “hardening”), which is the most
common pathologic condition resulting in conduction deafness in adults. It
is a consequence of new bone deposition of the labyrinthine spongy bone
bordering the oval window with subsequent fixation of the stapes on the
oval window. Otosclerosis can be surgically corrected by releasing the
stapes. A hearing aid often improves conduction deafness.
Sensorineural (nerve) deafness results following a lesion involving
the cochlea, the cochlear nerve, or the central auditory pathways. A lesion
involving the cochlea, the cochlear nerve, or the cochlear nuclei results in an
ipsilateral hearing deficit. Injury to the hair receptor cells may be caused from
extensive exposure to loud noise, antibiotics, or other drugs such as aspirin, or
various prenatal infections, such as rubella, cytomegalovirus, or syphilis.
The most prevalent sensorineural hearing deficit occurring in the elderly is
presbycusis (G. presbus, “old man;” cusis, “hearing”). This condition results
from the gradual degeneration of the spiral organ of Corti.
Acoustic neuroma (schwannoma or neurilemoma) is a tumor arising from
the Schwann cells covering the vestibulocochlear nerve (CN VIII). This tumor
appears in the internal auditory meatus, or close to the cerebellopontine angle
after the nerve leaves the brainstem in the posterior cranial fossa. This tumor
causes nerve destruction resulting in total loss of hearing (deafness) in the
ipsilateral ear and tinnitus (“ringing” sensation in the ear) and/or vestibular
symptoms.
Lesions involving the central auditory pathways (anywhere rostral to the
cochlear nuclei) result in minor hearing impairments mainly in the contralateralside. This is due to the bilateral projections of the auditory pathway.
The individual will have difficulty in localizing sounds in the contralateral side if
the lesion involves the ascending auditory pathways rostral to the level of the
pons, or if the primary or secondary auditory cortex is involved.
Recent studies support that genetic mutations are the underlying cause of
some cases (< 1%) of congenital bilateral deafness. The Jervell–LangeNielsen syndrome is a recessively inherited genetic disorder associated with
bilateral deafness. This syndrome results from the formation of defective ion
channel complexes in the stria vascularis lining the lateral wall of the cochlear
duct (scala media). The cells of the stria vascularis regulate the ionic composition of endolymph in the cochlear duct, which is an important component in
the formation of nerve impulses in the auditory system.
Hearing defects may result
from conduction deafness or
sensorineural deafness. Conduction
deafness usually involves the auditory
apparatus of the outer and/or middle
ear and is caused by a defect in the
mechanical transmission of sound from
the air-filled outer and/or middle ear to
the fluid-filled inner ear, which interferes
with sound conduction. Sensorineural
(nerve) deafness results following a lesion
involving the cochlea, the cochlear nerve,
or the central auditory pathways.
This case requires further testing
since clinical evaluation alone will not
determine the cause of deafness. The
other noted symptoms are vague or
nonspecific, although the dizziness
and imbalance could possibly indicate
vestibular or cerebellar dysfunction. This
patient should have a full examination by
an otolaryngologist and imaging of the
base of the skull, mastoid, inner ear, and
auditory canals. MRI is best but CT may
be adequate. This patient’s MRI (with
contrast) showed an acoustic neuroma
of the right eighth cranial nerve, more
properly known as a schwannoma.
An acoustic neuroma is a fairly
common, benign tumor of Schwann cells
(which provide myelin for all peripheral
nerves, including cranial nerves).
Schwannomas commonly arise from
cranial nerve VIII although they can
affect any nerve, particularly the cranial
nerves. Acoustic neuromas are bulbous
or fusiform tumors that are seen in the
cerebellopontine angle. The most common and initial symptom of an acoustic
neuroma is typically unilateral hearing
loss. Dizziness (even occasionally vertigo)
and ataxia can arise from dysfunction of
the vestibular portion of cranial nerve
VIII or from cerebellar dysfunction
secondary to compression. Other
symptoms, such as facial numbness or
weakness, can arise from compression
of the corresponding cranial nerves.
Acoustic neuromas are unilateral,
with one notable exception. Neurofibromatosis type II leads to multiple tumors,
including bilateral acoustic neuromas. A
cerebellopontine angle meningioma can
be confused with an acoustic neuroma.
The mainstay of treatment is surgical
excision. Hearing can only sometimes
be restored.
A 65-year-old woman presents
to the office with 2 weeks of dizziness. She described the dizziness as a
whirling sensation that made her feel as
though her head was spinning. Each spell
lasts for about 10–20 seconds. She has several spells per day, and notes that turning
in bed and looking upward exacerbates
this condition. Since these spells are so
incapacitating, she is afraid to move. She
feels normal in between these spells. She
does not have any ringing in the ears, or
visual, hearing, or speech problems.
Walking and balance are normal, except
during the dizzy spells. There has not
been any trauma, history of similar
dizziness, or recent infection.
Kinesthesis (G. kinein, “to move;” esthesis, “sensation”) is
mediated by a somatosensory system that makes us aware of
the relative position and motion of our various body parts
with respect to one another, and to objects in our environment that we may come in contact with. The position and
motion of different body parts are detected and monitored by
special receptors located in the muscles, tendons, and joints.
Our kinesthetic sense assists us in the maintenance of our
posture and the control of a myriad of voluntary motor
activities.
Working with our kinesthetic sense is the sense of equilibrium (balance), mediated by the vestibular system. The
vestibular system, a proprioceptive (somatosensory) system,
mediates the special functions of posture maintenance,
muscle tone, equilibrium, and coordination of head and eye
movements. Also, it transmits sensory information to the
brain regarding the position of the body and spatial
orientation.
The vestibular system is equipped with two groups of
receptors. One group detects angular acceleration (rotational
movement) of the head, as in turning the head from side to
side. The other group of receptors detects spatial orientation of
the head in space, relative to gravity and linear acceleration
or deceleration forces.
Sensory input from the visual, vestibular, and proprioceptive systems is integrated by the nervous system, especially
the cerebellum, to generate motor responses that maintain
equilibrium, posture, muscle tone, and reflex movements
of the eyes, all of which are carried out at the subconscious
level.
The sensory apparatus of the
vestibular system resides in
the inner ear, housed in the
petrous portion of the temporal bone and is composed
of a bony (osseous) labyrinth
(G., “maze”) and a membranous labyrinth. Sensory information about the orientation
and motion of the head (not the body), is detected by the
receptors in the vestibular (sensory) apparatus (Figs 18.1,
18.2) and is relayed to the vestibular nuclei in the brainstem and the cerebellum by the vestibular nerve (the
vestibular division of the vestibulocochlear nerve, CN VIII).
The vestibular system, in concert with the cerebellum, then
mediates appropriate postural adjustments.
The bony labyrinth of the
inner ear (Fig. 18.2) includes
the cochlea, three bony
semicircular canals, and the
vestibule. The cochlea is a
special receptor that mediates hearing and has no function
in equilibrium (and is discussed in Chapter 17). The semicircular canals and the vestibule, however, are associated
with equilibrium.
There are three semicircular canals in the inner ear. They are
the anterior (superior), lateral (horizontal), and posterior
(inferior) canals. The semicircular canals are oriented along
three planes of angular or rotational movement, at nearly
right angles to each other. Both ends of the C-shaped canals
attach to and open into the bony vestibule (Fig. 18.2). The
anterior canal (a vertically oriented semicircular canal) of
each side, is positioned anterolateral to the median plane
(about 45° from the coronal plane). It is oriented parallel to
the posterior canal (also a vertically oriented semicircular
canal), on the contralateral side, which is positioned posterolateral to the median plane (about 45° from the coronal plane).
These two canals function as a pair. The two lateral canals of
the right and left sides are oriented in the same (horizontal)
plane, and they too function as a pair.
Pilots and astronauts refer to the three planes of rotational
movement as pitch, roll, and yaw. Pitch refers to forward and
backward tilting of the head, as when we nod our head “yes.”
Roll refers to tilting the head sideways from one shoulder
to the other shoulder, and yaw refers to movement of the
head form side to side, as when indicating “no.” The lateral
semicircular canals are oriented in the horizontal yaw plane,
whereas the anterior and posterior semicircular canals are
oriented in the half pitch/half roll planes.
When the head is in its normal upright position, the
anterior and posterior canals are oriented almost in the vertical plane, whereas the lateral canals are oriented almost in the
horizontal plane. During a certain movement that affects a
particular functional pair of canals (i.e., the two lateral canals,
or the right anterior and left posterior, or the right posterior
and left anterior), the receptors in one canal of the pair are
stimulated and excite the afferent axons of the vestibulocochlear nerve, whereas the receptors in its complementary
canal on the contralateral side, are inhibited and diminish
neural activity.
The vestibule is a component of the bony labyrinth, receiving the open ends of the three semicircular canals. It is a
perilymph-filled space that is continuous with the perilymphatic space of the semicircular canals. The vestibule houses
two membranous sacs, the utricle and saccule. The utricle
and saccule each contain an elliptical-shaped sensory receptor,
the macula (L., “spot”) (see below).
The membranous labyrinth
is housed within the bony
labyrinth, and reflects its
general shape and contour.
The space separating the
bony labyrinth from the
membranous labyrinth is
the perilymphatic space, filled with a fluid referred to as
perilymph, which is comparable to extracellular fluid. The
membranous labyrinth consists of a series of membranous
sacs and ducts filled with another viscous fluid, referred to as
endolymph, which is comparable to intracellular fluid. The
components of the membranous labyrinth associated with
equilibrium are the three (membranous) semicircular ducts
(which are enclosed in the respective three bony semicircular
canals) and the (membranous) utricle and saccule, two saclike structures that are enclosed within the bony vestibule.
The region of the membranous labyrinth containing the
receptor for hearing is the cochlear duct, which is enclosed
in the bony cochlea (discussed in Chapter 17). Endolymph
percolates (flows) in the three membranous semicircular
ducts, the utricle, the saccule, and the cochlear duct. The
ductus reuniens permits communication between the lumen
of the cochlear duct with the lumen of the components of
the vestibular membranous labyrinth. Both ends of each of
the semicircular ducts are attached to, and empty into, the
utricle.
Each semicircular duct has a single dilated segment, an
ampulla (L., “dilation”), near one of its ends. The ampullae of
the three semicircular ducts, as well as the utricle and saccule,
contain in their interior the sensory receptors of the vestibular system. The receptors in the ampullae of the semicircular
ducts are the cristae ampullares, whereas the receptors in the
utricle and the saccule are the macula utriculi and the macula
sacculi, respectively (Figs 18.3, 18.4). Thus there are a total of
five receptors (three cristae and two maculae) in each vestibular sensory apparatus. The cristae ampullares of the semicircular canals rest in a patch of neuroepithelium at the base
of each ampulla. The macula utriculi rests in a strip of neuroepithelium on the base of the utricle, whereas the macula
sacculi is oriented vertically on the medial wall of the saccule.
The vestibular receptors
consist of a distinct area
of neuroepithelium inside
the membranous labyrinth,
composed of mechanoreceptor “hair cells” and support
cells that fill the spaces among the hair cells (see Figs 18.3,
18.4). The hair cells display sensory “hairs,” many stiff stereocilia (specialized, elongated microvilli, and not true cilia),
and a single immotile kinocilium. These hair cells, like the
hair cells in the cochlea that are involved in hearing, are transducers that transform the mechanical stimulation imposed on
them, into electrical signals. Electrical signals are transmitted
to, and are then conveyed by, the vestibular nerve to the
brainstem and cerebellum. Both afferent and efferent nerve
endings terminate on the basal and lateral aspects of the hair
cells. The neuroepithelia of the cristae ampullares, macula
utriculi, and macula sacculi are covered with a gelatinous
glycoprotein membrane. The stereocilia and kinocilia are
embedded in this membrane. Movement of the hair cells with
respect to the membrane results in a process by which
mechanical deformation of the stereocilia and kinocilia is
transformed into an electrical potential.
In the utricle and the saccule,
the gelatinous glycoprotein
membranes overlying their
macula have, on their free
surface, otoconia (G., “ear
dust”) also referred to as otoliths (G., “ear stones”)—crystals
consisting of calcium carbonate (see Fig. 18.3). Since the
gelatinous glycoprotein membrane of the utricle and the saccule has otoliths, it is referred to as the otolithic membrane,
and the utricle and the saccule are referred to as otolithic
organs. The otoliths have a specific gravity that is greater
than that of the endolymph which surrounds them, and they
are consequently pulled by gravity. Gravity applies a continuous linear acceleration on the head, and thus deflects
the gelatinous membrane, which in turn stimulates the hair
cells.
The glycoprotein membrane of the cristae ampullares
is dome-shaped and is called the cupula, which is devoid
of crystals (see Fig. 18.4). The cupula increases resistance
to the flow of endolymph and unlike the otolithic membranes
is not influenced by gravitational forces. Instead, it responds
to endolymphatic flow. The cupula is a mechanical structure that narrows the lumen of the canal and so increases
resistance to flow. The three cristae ampullares enclosed in
the semicircular duct ampullae (one crista in each ampulla)
detect angular acceleration or deceleration (rotational movement) of the head (as in turning or tilting the head). The
differing orientation of the three semicircular ducts enable
an individual to perceive motion in all planes. Head rotation
in a particular plane will result in endolymphatic flow in the
functional pair of canals oriented closest to the plane of rotation, and is almost perpendicular to the axis of rotation. Head
rotation in a plane that is not parallel to that of any one canal,
will activate more than one canal.
The receptors in the utricle and saccule (the macula
utriculi and macula sacculi within the utricle and the saccule,
respectively) detect spatial orientation of the head in space
relative to gravity and linear acceleration or deceleration
forces. The receptors in the utricle and in the saccule are oriented perpendicular to each other, and therefore can detect
motion in two different planes. When the head is upright, the
macula utriculi is oriented in the horizontal plane (on the base
of the utricle) and can be stimulated (activated) by linear
forces (acceleration or deceleration) in the horizontal plane
(as occur in a car, when it increases speed or slows down).
The macula sacculi is oriented in the vertical plane (on the
medial wall of the saccule) and can be stimulated (activated)
by linear forces (acceleration or deceleration) in the vertical
plane (as occur in an ascending or descending elevator). Note
that the macula utriculi and the macula sacculi perceive head
orientation when the body itself is at rest, but is exposed to
external forces.
When the body is at rest, and the head is tilted, the otoconia
(resting on the gelatinous membrane of the macula utriculi
and the macula sacculi) are pulled by gravitational forces,
causing the membrane to slant, which in turn deflects the
“hairs” (of the hair cells) embedded in it. The hair deflection
stimulates the mechanoreceptor hair cells, which in turn
transmit the stimulation to the vestibular nerve dendrites
synapsing with them.
In angular (rotational) movement of the head (Fig. 18.5),
the bony semicircular canals and the enclosed membranous
semicircular ducts rotate at the same velocity as the head.
However, the viscous endolymph filling the ducts resists
flow initially, and thus “falls behind” due to inertia (that is,
the endolymph does not move as fast as the canals). This
resistance causes a relative motion difference between the
faster moving cupula (which is attached to the interior of
the semicircular ducts) and the slower endolymphatic flow.
This motion difference results in flow of the endolymph in
the direction opposite to that of the crista’s cupula, pressing
against and tilting the cupula. This action deflects the stereocilia embedded in the cupula. The stereocilia that are
deflected away from the kinocilium (caused by the endolymphatic flow away from the kinocilium) elicits hyperpolarization (inhibition) of the hair cell. Whereas the stereocilia that
are deflected toward the kinocilium (by endolymphatic flow
toward the kinocilium) stretch the hair cell membrane and
elicit depolarization (excitation) of the hair cell, and therefore initiate a nerve impulse that is relayed to the vestibular
nerve afferent peripheral nerve endings. Flow of endolymph
in the direction of the ampulla of the horizontal canal results
in deflection of the stereocilia toward the kinocilium, which
stimulates the hair cell. In the anterior and posterior
semicircular canals, flow of endolymph in the direction of
the ampulla has the opposite effect, that is the hair cells
are inhibited. If rotation is sustained, the endolymph of the
semicircular canals eventually moves at the same rate as the
cupula. When this occurs, the cupula is no longer pushed and
bent by the endolymph, and the stereocilia and kinocilia are
no longer deflected. Since the hair cells are no longer depolarized, the semicircular canal receptors are not activated by
sustained rotation. Following about 20 seconds of continued
rotation, however, the cupula slowly recoils back to its resting position. When the head stops rotating, so do the ducts
and the canals. However, the endolymphatic flow persists
within the membranous duct due to its momentum, pressing
on, and bending the cupula from its resting position in the
opposite direction (in the same direction as the head had been
rotating), causing the stereocilia to bend away from the
kinocilium, thus inhibiting the hair cell from firing completely. A few seconds later, endolymphatic flow ceases and
within 20 seconds the cupula once again recoils back to its
resting position, permitting the hair cell to emit impulses at a
tonic level. Therefore, the semicircular canal conveys a positive signal at the onset of head rotation only if movement is
in the correct direction, and conveys a negative signal when
head rotation ceases.
It is important to note that the function of the equilibratory senses mediated by the vestibular system is to perceive
differences in the relative movement between the endolymph
and the receptor gelatinous membrane (as occur during the
onset and cessation of rotation), rather than to merely detect
motion (when sustained rotation is in progress).
Slow, slight rotation sends signals to the brain that indicate movement. Fast, intense rotation (as well as motion sickness that occurs in a car or boat) overwhelms the receptors,
sending a flood of signals to the brain, with consequent dizziness and/or nausea. When an individual is aboard a ship in a
room without a window and cannot see outside, his vestibular
system sends information to the brain that he is moving (since
the ship is moving), however he cannot “see” that he is actually moving. The inconsistency of the sensory information (or
sensory mismatch) that is sent to the brain by the vestibular
and visual systems causes him to feel seasick. Going out on
deck where he can see that he is moving, which confirms the
vestibular input to the brain, alleviates the symptoms.
When an individual (such as an astronaut) is exposed
to an environment with zero gravity, he experiences space
sickness, an unusual phenomenon affecting his sense of
equilibrium. Some scientists believe that in space, the brain
receives only slight or no vestibular sensory input due to the
lack of gravity, causing space sickness. Others believe that
space sickness is similar to car or sea sickness and is caused
by a sensory mismatch as described above.
The cell bodies of the first
order bipolar neurons of the
vestibular pathway reside
in the vestibular (Scarpa’s)
ganglion, a sensory ganglion
of the vestibular nerve. The
peripheral processes of these bipolar neurons (Fig. 18.6)
terminate in the cristae ampullares of the semicircular ducts,
the macula utriculi of the utricle, and the macula sacculi of
the saccule, where they form synapses with the mechanoreceptor epithelial “hair cells.” The hair cells are transducers;
that is, they transform mechanical stimulation into electrical
stimulation (action potentials), which is relayed to the dendritic terminals of the first order bipolar neurons. The central
processes of the bipolar neurons gather to form the root of the
vestibular nerve (the vestibular division of the vestibulocochlear nerve, CN VIII). In the inner ear, the vestibular
nerve joins the cochlear nerve, to form the vestibulocochlear
nerve. Although the two nerves accompany one another
wrapped in a common connective tissue sheath, they are
anatomically and functionally two distinct nerves. From the
inner ear, the vestibulocochlear nerve passes through the
internal auditory meatus to enter the posterior cranial vault.
As the vestibulocochlear nerve enters the brainstem at the
pontomedullary angle, it separates into its two component
nerves. The fibers of the cochlear nerve synapse in the
cochlear nuclei in the medulla (as discussed in Chapter 17).
The vestibular nerve fibers enter the vestibular nuclei
located in the pons and upper medulla, where most of the
central processes of the vestibular nerve bifurcate into
ascending and descending terminals. Some first order
vestibular fibers, however, do not terminate in the vestibular
nuclei, but take an alternate route by going around them,
joining the juxtarestiform body in the inferior cerebellar
peduncle and terminating directly in the ipsilateral flocculonodular lobe of the cerebellum. This direct termination of
the central processes of the first order bipolar neurons in the
cerebellum is unique to the vestibular system.
Unlike other sensory systems, the projections of the
vestibular system are mainly
reflexive in nature (Fig. 18.7).
Sensory input is integrated
to produce coordinated
movement of the head, eyes, and body, and to maintain
equilibrium and muscle tone. The vestibular system mainly
projects to the following structures:
1 The motor nuclei of the oculomotor, trochlear, and
abducens nerves that innervate the extraocular muscles
and thus control reflex eye movements.
2 The cerebellum, which integrates sensory input from various systems and coordinates head and body movement.
3 The reticular formation at the pontine and medullary
levels, where reflex motor activity is initiated.
4 The spinal cord, where postural adjustments can be
made.
he vestibular nuclear complex is composed of four
vestibular nuclei (Fig. 18.6.),
and the central processes
of the first order bipolar
neurons of the vestibular
(Scarpa’s) ganglion that terminate there. The four vestibular nuclei are:
1 The superior (Bechterew’s) vestibular nucleus.
2 The medial (Schwalbe’s) vestibular nucleus.
3 The lateral (Deiter’s) vestibular nucleus.
4 The inferior (spinal, descending) vestibular nucleus.
The vestibular nuclei are located in the upper medulla and
lower pons, lateral to the fourth ventricle, in close proximity
to the cerebellum. The superior nucleus is located entirely in
the pons, whereas the other three nuclei extend into both the
caudal pons and the rostral medulla. These nuclei contain
the cell bodies of second order neurons whose fibers carry
outflow signals to various destinations.
The superior and medial vestibular nuclei receive the
first order neuron terminals relaying sensory input from
the cristae ampullares of the semicircular canals. Following
the reception of this sensory input, these nuclei then relay it
via two structures:
1 The medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF) to the extraocular muscle nuclei to elicit compensatory ocular
movements triggered by movements of the head.
2 The medial vestibulospinal tract to the cervical spinal
cord to elicit suitable head movements.
The lateral vestibular nucleus receives vestibular sensory
input mainly from the maculae of the utricle, but may also
receive input from the saccule and semicircular canals.
This nucleus projects via the lateral vestibulospinal tract to
motoneurons or interneurons at all spinal cord levels to make
postural adjustments.
The inferior vestibular nucleus receives vestibular
sensory input from the semicircular canals as well as the
utricle. Most of the first order vestibular fibers terminate in
this nucleus. It projects to the reticular formation and the
cerebellum.
The vestibular nuclei
and the cerebellum serve
as the first relay centers of
the vestibular pathway. The
vestibular nerve is unique
since it is the only cranial
nerve that sends some of its first order afferent fibers relaying
sensory input directly from peripheral receptors to the cerebellar cortex.
The vestibular nuclei receive
afferent (input) projections
from numerous sources.
There are a number of input
sources to the vestibular nuclei:
1 The central processes of the bipolar first order neurons
of the vestibular nerve, which transmit sensory input
from the vestibular receptor apparatus in the inner ear (as
discussed above; see Fig. 18.6).
2 The vestibulocerebellum (the flocculus and nodulus)
and part of the uvula, which project their fibers to the
ipsilateral vestibular nuclei via the juxtarestiform body
(Fig. 18.8).
3 The spinocerebellum (the vermis of the anterior lobe of
the cerebellum), which projects its fibers to the ipsilateral
vestibular nuclei via the juxtarestiform body.
4 The fastigial nucleus of the cerebellum, which projects
bilaterally to the vestibular nuclei via the fastigiovestibular tract.
5 The reciprocal connections from the contralateral
vestibular nuclei.
6 The spinal cord.
7 The pretectal nuclei.
The spinal cord sends proprioceptive information to the
vestibular nuclei via the spinovestibular tract regarding the
orientation status of the body so that postural adjustments
can be made.
The vestibular nuclei project second order fibers to the following areas (see Fig. 18.7):
1 The oculomotor, trochlear, and abducens motor nuclei
as well as the accessory oculomotor nuclei: the interstitial
nucleus of Cajal, and the nucleus of Darkschewitch via the
medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF).
2 The contralateral vestibular nuclei, most of which are
reciprocal inhibitory connections.
3 The inferior olivary nucleus (via the vestibulo-olivary
tract), which in turn projects to the cerebellar vermis via
the restiform body.
4 The ipsilateral flocculus and nodulus (both of which are
associated with equilibrium and receive sensory information from the semicircular canals).
5 The uvula.
6 The fastigial nucleus of the cerebellum (bilaterally),
via the juxtarestiform body (note that the juxtarestiform
body consists of two-directional traffic; that is, it carries
both afferent and efferent fibers connecting the vestibular
nuclei and the cerebellum).
7 Spinal cord ventral horn alpha and gamma motoneurons
and interneurons.
8 The vestibular labyrinth, where descending efferent
fibers modulate afferent input to the vestibular nuclei.
The superior vestibular nucleus fibers join the ipsilateral
and contralateral MLF and project to the oculomotor
nuclear complex as well as the trochlear nuclei bilaterally.
Some of the fibers arising from the medial vestibular nucleus
join the ipsilateral and the contralateral MLF to terminate
in the oculomotor nuclear complex and the abducens
nucleus bilaterally, whereas other medial vestibular nuclear
fibers join only the contralateral MLF and terminate in the
contralateral trochlear nucleus and inter-stitial nucleus of
Cajal.
Fibers arising from the inferior vestibular nucleus join
the ipsilateral and contralateral MLF to terminate in the
oculomotor and trochlear nuclei bilaterally.
All of these ascending (output) connections function in
the coordination of eye movements. Since the MLF also carries
descending fibers from the medial vestibular nucleus to the
spinal cord (see below), it functions in the coordination of
head, eye, and neck movements.
The lateral vestibulospinal tract originates only from the
lateral vestibular nucleus. This tract descends ipsilaterally
and terminates at all levels of the spinal cord although it projects more fibers at the cervical and lumbar levels, where it
synapses with both interneurons and with alpha and gamma
motoneurons in the spinal cord ventral horn. On its way to
the spinal cord, the lateral vestibulospinal tract gives rise to
collaterals that synapse in the reticular formation of the
medulla. Functionally, the lateral vestibulospinal tract regulates the activity of spinal cord motoneurons in order to maintain posture. It forms excitatory synapses with the alpha and
gamma motoneurons whose fibers innervate extensor (antigravity) muscles in the neck, trunk, and lower limb, as well as
inhibitory synapses via interneurons to the alpha and gamma
motoneurons that innervate flexor muscles (causing their
relaxation).
The medial vestibulospinal tract originates primarily
from the medial vestibular nucleus. This tract descends
bilaterally in the MLF and terminates in the cervical spinal
cord where it, too, forms synapses with interneurons and
alpha and gamma motoneurons, innervating neck extensors.
Functionally, since the medial vestibulospinal tract terminates in the cervical spinal cord, it serves to coordinate head
and ocular movements.
The inferior vestibular nucleus gives rise to fibers that
terminate in the inferior olivary nucleus, the reticular formation in the medulla, the cerebellum, and the cervical spinal
cord via the MLF.
All output vestibular projections distribute collaterals in
the medullary, pontine, and mesencephalic reticular formation. These relays play an important function in the reflexive
control and coordination of head and eye movements.
The superior and lateral
vestibular nuclei give rise to
second order fibers that join
the MLF bilaterally to ascend
to the ventral posterior lateral and ventral posterior inferior nuclei of the thalamus.
The thalamus gives rise to third order fibers that terminate
in the primary vestibular cortex (Brodmann’s area 3a) in
the parietal lobe, located next to the primary motor area
(Brodmann’s area 4). Brodmann’s area 3a is believed to be the
site of integration of sensory input from the vestibular and
other proprioceptive systems (see Fig. 18.8). The associations
between Brodmann’s areas 3a and 4 serve in the regulation of
motor activity.
Eye movements are categorized into conjugate eye
movements and disconjugate (disjunctive) eye movements. Conjugate eye
movements, in which both eyes turn toward the same direction simultaneously (i.e., to the right or to the left), include:
(i) smooth pursuit eye movements, which are involuntary,
slow, and smooth, and occur during the tracking of a moving
object (note that smooth pursuit can only be elicited if there
is an actual moving stimulus to track); (ii) optokinetic eye
movements, which are tracking eye movements and are
triggered by motion of the visual field; (iii) saccadic eye
movements, which are rapid and abrupt, voluntary or
involuntary, and change the point of visual fixation; and
(iv) vestibular eye movements, which are involuntary eye
movements triggered by head movements (i.e., the vestibuloocular reflex). Disconjugate eye movements consist of
vergence eye movements in which both eyes turn in opposite directions simultaneously. Vergence eye movements are
involuntary and may be: (i) convergent (both eyes are
adducted, i.e., rotate toward the midline, when we focus
on an object close to our face); or (ii) divergent (i.e., eyes
rotate away from the midline toward their normal position
when we are looking at an object as we move it away from
our face).
The motor nuclei (oculomotor, trochlear, and abducens
nuclei, containing lower motoneurons) innervating the
extraocular muscles receive inputs from various sources,
which indirectly control voluntary or involuntary ocular
movements. There are four principal projection sources to
these nuclei.
1 Upper motoneurons from the frontal eye field controlling voluntary eye movements.
2 The vestibular system, which detects head motion and
coordinates head and eye movements via: (i) the pontine reticular formation lateral gaze center (also referred to as the
paramedian pontine reticular formation) that controls
conjugate horizontal ocular movements; and (ii) a center for
vertical gaze in the periaqueductal gray of the mesencephalon, which controls conjugate vertical ocular movements, in order to keep the eyes fixed on a stationary object
as the head is moving.
3 Projections from the visual cortex to the rostral midbrain
(vertical gaze center and lateral gaze center), that play a
role in the tracking of a moving object by moving the eyes in
order to maintain the image of a moving object on the
retina.
4 Projections from the auditory system that play a role in
causing a sudden (reflex) turning of the eyes in the direction of a startling sound.
The extraocular muscles
that control ocular movements receive innervation
from motoneurons whose
cell bodies are housed in the
oculomotor, trochlear, and
abducens nuclei. The superior oblique is innervated by
the trochlear nerve, the lateral rectus is innervated by the
abducent nerve, whereas the remainder of the extraocular
muscles, the superior and inferior rectus, the medial rectus,
and the inferior oblique, are innervated by the oculomotor
nerve. To produce smooth, coordinated ocular movements as
one extraocular muscle contracts, its antagonists relax.
As the head moves, the eyes may gaze at a motionless
object by reflex activity mediated by vestibular neural circuits
that connect the vestibular system (which detects orientation
and movement of the head in space) with the cranial nerve
nuclei (innervating the appropriate extraocular muscles).
This elicits compensatory ocular movements, so that the
object can remain in the field of vision.
When the head is turned (e.g., to the right), it induces subtle
endolymphatic flow in both horizontal semicircular canals.
The endolymph flows to the left since its inertia causes it
to “fall behind” relative to the movement of the head. The
endolymphatic flow causes deflection of the cupula in the
right horizontal canal ampulla, bending the “hair cell” sensory hairs toward the kinocilium, and increasing the neural
activity of the crista ampullaris of the right horizontal canal
ampulla. There is a simultaneous decrease in neural activity
of the crista ampullaris of the left horizontal canal ampulla.
The depolarized hair cells (in the right horizontal canal
ampulla) transmit sensory information to the peripheral
(dendritic) terminals of the first order, vestibular ganglion
neurons. The central processes of these neurons terminate
in the ipsilateral (in this example, right) vestibular nuclei
where they synapse with neurons whose axons join the MLF
and terminate in the contralateral (left) abducens nucleus
(Fig. 18.9). In the abducens nucleus, the axon terminals
synapse with and stimulate the motoneurons that project directly to, and innervate, the contralateral (left) lateral rectus
muscle as well as another group of neurons that cross the
midline, join the contralateral (right) MLF and terminate in
the contralateral (right) oculomotor nucleus where they
synapse with the motoneurons that innervate the right
medial rectus muscle. Thus the muscles that would cause
conjugate horizontal ocular movement in the opposite direction to that of the head movement are stimulated.
The second order vestibular fibers that terminate in the
ipsilateral (right) abducens nucleus inhibit the motoneurons
that project directly to, and innervate, the ipsilateral (right)
lateral rectus muscle as well as another group of neurons that
cross the midline, join the contralateral MLF, and terminate
in the contralateral (left) oculomotor nucleus where they synapse with the motoneurons that innervate the contralateral
(left) medial rectus muscle. Thus, the muscles that would
cause conjugate (simultaneous) horizontal ocular movement
in the same direction as the head movement are inhibited.
The outcome of this mechanism is the reflex turning of
both eyes to the left to maintain an image on the retina as the
head is turned to the right.
In summary, when an individual fixes his gaze on (“stares
at”) an object and then begins to turn his head, for example to
the right, the eyes will reflexly (via MLF vestibular connections to the extraocular nuclei) “turn” to the left (as the head is
moving), which is opposite to the direction of head movement. This turning of the eyes (dictated by vestibular reflex
connections) compensates for the shifting of head position in
order to maintain visual fixation on an object. Otherwise, without this vestibular reflex mechanism coupling head and eye
movements, as the erect head moves from a certain position
(to the right or to the left) the eyes would remain still, perceiving a changing visual field in the duration of head movement.
The vestibulocerebellum regulates vestibulo-ocular reflex
activity in order to produce compensatory ocular movement
for the head movement and can cancel it so that the eyes can
move from a target.
During movement of the
head in the vertical plane
(tilting upward, backward;
or downward, forward),
information is transmitted
from the canal-specific
vestibular system via reflex
circuit connections to the trochlear and oculomotor nuclei,
which innervate extraocular muscles controlling vertical eye
movement. If the head is erect and the eyes are fixed (“stare
at”) on an object, as the head is tilted forward or backward, a
reflex will be automatically activated. This causes a “reflex
turning” of the eyes upward or downward, respectively, in
order to maintain visual fixation on the object.
When tilting the head forward, the eyes will reflexly turn
upward. This is caused by endolymphatic flow in the anterior
(superior) vertical semicircular canal and the subsequent
deflection of its cupula. Deflection of the cupula stimulates
the hair cells, which transmit sensory input to the ipsilateral
vestibular nuclei. The first order fibers synapse with both
inhibitory and excitatory second order vestibular neurons
(Fig. 18.10).
Second order inhibitory vestibular neurons join the ipsilateral MLF and ascend to, terminate in, and inhibit: (i) the
ipsilateral trochlear nucleus, whose neurons give rise to
fibers that decussate and then exit the brainstem to innervate
the contralateral superior oblique muscle; and (ii) the oculomotor nucleus, which sends fibers to innervate the ipsilateral
inferior rectus muscle.
Second order excitatory vestibular neurons give rise to
fibers that decussate, join the contralateral MLF, and ascend
to terminate in the contralateral oculomotor nucleus where
they synapse with neurons that innervate the contralateral
superior rectus and inferior oblique muscles.
In summary, as the head tilts forward, the eyes turn
upward by the simultaneous inhibition of the neurons that
innervate the superior oblique and inferior rectus muscles
of both eyes, and the stimulation of the neurons that innervate the superior rectus and inferior oblique muscles of both
eyes.
When tilting the head backward, the eyes will reflexly turn
downward. This is caused by endolymphatic flow in the
posterior (inferior) vertical semicircular canal and the subsequent deflection of its cupula. Deflection of the cupula
stimulates the hair cells, which transmit sensory input to the
ipsilateral vestibular nuclei. The first order neurons synapse
with both inhibitory and excitatory second order vestibular
neurons (Fig. 18.11).
Second order inhibitory vestibular neurons join the
ipsilateral MLF and ascend to terminate in the oculomotor
nucleus where they synapse with neurons that inhibit the
ipsilateral superior rectus and inferior oblique muscles.
Second order excitatory vestibular neurons give rise to
fibers that decussate, join the contralateral MLF, and terminate in: (i) the trochlear nucleus, where they synapse with
neurons that give rise to fibers that cross the midline and exit
in the trochlear nerve, to innervate the superior oblique
muscle; and (ii) the oculomotor nucleus, where they synapse
with neurons that innervate the inferior rectus muscle.
In summary, when the head tilts backward, the eyes turn
downward by the simultaneous inhibition of the superior
rectus and inferior oblique muscles of both eyes and the stimulation of the superior oblique and inferior rectus muscles of
both eyes.
Horizontal nystagmus is a
normal movement of the
eyes when it is induced by
activation of the vestibular
apparatus. The distinguishing characteristic of nystagmus is a rhythmic, back and
forth movement of the eyes, with a slow component in one
direction, and a fast component (rapid return) in the other
direction following asymmetric stimulation of the vestibular
sensory apparatus of the two sides.
Spontaneous nystagmus, however, is pathologic, and is
indicative of a lesion affecting the vestibular nuclei. A lesion
in the vestibular apparatus, nerve, nuclei, or pathways, or the
vestibulocerebellum, may produce nystagmus.
In addition to horizontal nystagmus, there are also vertical and rotatory nystagmus. Vertical nystagmus may result
following damage involving the superior vestibular nucleus
in the pons. Extensive damage in the pontomedullary junction affecting the entire vestibular nuclear complex results in
rotatory nystagmus.
To test the functional integrity of the vestibular system,
two clinical tests—the rotation test and the caloric test—may
be performed.
In the rotation test, the individual sits in a Barany chair
with his head upright and tilted at 30° anteriorly. In this position the horizontal semicircular canals are oriented parallel
to the plane of rotation. The individual is then rotated about
10 complete rotations to either the right or left, maintaining
a continuous angular acceleration of the head. The rotation
is then suddenly ceased. If, for example, the individual (with
normal vestibular apparatus) is rotated to the right, the rotation will stimulate the right horizontal semicircular canal and
then the stimulation will be transmitted to the right vestibular nuclei. The endolymphatic flow will tilt the cupula of
the right horizontal semicircular canal to the left, due to the
relative motion difference of the cupula and the endolymph.
As rotation continues, the endolymph will “catch up” and
flow at the same speed as the canal and head, which will no
longer activate the cupula. Sudden stopping of the rotation
causes the endolymph, due to its inertia, to continue flowing
in the direction of rotation, tilting the cupula to the left, which
will inhibit the hair cells. During rotation, the eyes will move
slowly to the left (slow component) in order to maintain visual fixation, and then will flick back (fast component) to the
center (right) (Fig. 18.12). The nystagmus is in the direction
of the spin, to the right. As the rotation is suddenly stopped,
the direction of nystagmus is in the opposite direction (to the
left), to that which occurs during rotation (which was to the
right). This is known as postrotatory nystagmus. Normally,
postrotatory nystagmus lasts for about half a minute.
In addition to the above reactions, the individual will lean
or fall to the right (the same direction as the rotation) and
experience vertigo (subjective sensation of rotation) to the left
(opposite to the direction of rotation). If the subject is asked to
point at a target, he will exhibit past pointing, in which the
subject’s arm points in the direction of the rotation. Since
nystagmus is named after the fast component, in this case it
is to the right.
The caloric test may be used
to stimulate each vestibular
apparatus, or specific semicircular canals, in conscious
or unconscious individuals.
The caloric test allows for the examination of the vestibular
apparatus of only one side at a time. In a rotational test, on the
contrary, both sides are stimulated simultaneously.
For the caloric test, the horizontal canal has to be oriented
in the vertical plane. To stimulate the horizontal canal, the subject sits upright with his head inclined about 60° posteriorly.
The external auditory meatus is subsequently irrigated with
SYNONYMS AND EPONYMS
OF THE VESTIBULAR SYSTEM
cold or warm water. The cold or warm temperature of the
water produces vestibular apparatus fluid circulation currents. Cold water produces a sinking of the fluid, whereas
warm water produces a rising of the fluid.
In a subject with a normal vestibulo-ocular system, when
the left ear is irrigated with cold water, flushing causes
nystagmus (fast component) toward the opposite side (to the
right), with accompanying past pointing and falling on the
same side as the stimulation. When the same ear is irrigated
with warm water, the nystagmus (fast component) is to the
left (that is, the subject exhibits the opposite response).
If the subject is comatose, nystagmus is not observable. If
the brainstem is undamaged, cold irrigation will cause both
eyes to turn to the side of the cold irrigation. If the subject has
a lesion affecting the MLF bilaterally, cold irrigation will
cause the eye ipsilateral to the irrigation to turn toward the
side of the cold irrigation. If there is a lesion in the caudal
brainstem, affecting the vestibular nuclear complex, deviation of the eyes is not present.
This patient has benign
positional vertigo. This is the most
common identifiable vertigo and it occurs
most frequently in older individuals,
although it can occur at any age. It is
common and probably underdiagnosed.
It is thought to be caused from free floating debris or particles in the endolymph
of one of the semicircular canals, most
commonly the posterior semicircular
canal. Free floating particles are also
derived from calcium carbonate crystals
or otoliths. These crystals are normally
associated with the macula in the utricle
or the saccule and can at times become
“dislodged and float in the endolymph.”1
The cause of this pathology is unknown,
but it is sometimes associated with
trauma. This condition most often
resolves on its own eventually, but can
recur. Medications are often ineffective in
the treatment of this condition. For a more
complete description, please refer to the
article by Furman and Cass.1
The evaluation of dizziness requires
that the patient describes exactly what he
or she mean by dizziness. Dizziness can
result from vertigo, which is an illusion of
movement when there is actually no
movement occurring. This is the same
sensation produced when one is spun
around and then suddenly stopped. The
term dizziness is often used to refer to a
vague sensation of imbalance, dysequilibrium, or light-headedness. This is often
nonspecific and indeed non-neurologic.
In contrast, vertigo is quite specific and
usually indicates a problem either in the
inner ear, the brainstem (specifically the
posterolateral medulla), and/or the
cerebellum. If it is an inner ear problem,
it is often associated with hearing loss
and/or tinnitus.
A 32-year-old male carpenter
fell backwards off a ladder while
at work about a month ago. His coworkers said that he hit the back of his head,
but the patient does not remember this.
He apparently lost consciousness for
approximately 10 minutes, and was sent
to the emergency room. A head CT performed in the ER was normal, including
the sinuses. There was no apparent skull
fracture. He recovered alertness and
awareness and insisted on going home.
Symptoms of headache and dizziness
subsided after a few days. However, he
has continued to experience a persistent
loss of the sense of smell and taste since
his accident. Food tastes bland, and he
cannot fully sense odors such as coffee,
freshly cut lumber, or his wife’s perfume.
Examination shows his sense of
smell to be greatly diminished when
tested with several types of odiferous
substances, in both nostrils. Taste
sensation was normal for sweet, salty,
bitter, and sour. Examination of the nose
and sinuses was normal. The remaining
general physical and neurologic exam
was normal.
The olfactory system mediating the special sense of smell is
phylogenetically one of the most primitive sensory systems.
Although humans do not rely to a great extent on their olfactory sense, the survival of many other animals is greatly
dependent on olfaction. This is reflected in the relative
size difference of the olfactory systems—that of humans
being rather rudimentary compared with that of many other
animals. In humans the olfactory epithelium consists of about
10 cm2
, compared to about 170 cm2 in dogs; dogs also have
more than 100 times more receptors in each square centimeter than humans. The olfactory system is not only implicated
in the perception and transmission of olfactory sensation, but is
also believed to affect other neural systems associated with
producing or influencing emotional, behavioral, and reflex
responses such as reproductive and maternal behaviors, and
autonomic visceral functions such as salivation, gastric secretion, and nausea.
The ancestral cerebrum consisted of a pair of swellings,
which received olfactory input from the olfactory bulbs
and whose principal function was to mediate olfactory sensation. During evolution, the ancestral brain underwent
modifications resulting in the enlargement and increased
complexity of the cerebrum. These gradual changes were
accompanied by the emergence and vast expansion of the
neocortex with a consequent movement of the paleocortex to
a more internal position at the base of the brain.
Olfactory receptor cells, the
first order bipolar neurons
of the olfactory pathway,
reside in the olfactory epithelium (and not in a ganglion),
and are the only neurons that are in direct contact with the
environment.
The nasal cavities are lined by a special membrane, the
nasal mucosa, that is modified at the roof and the adjacent
superior walls of these cavities into a specialized thick
olfactory epithelium (neuroepithelium) and underlying
connective tissue (Fig. 19.1). This pseudostratified ciliated
columnar epithelium includes several cell types, namely basal
cells, immature receptor cells, olfactory receptor cells, and
supporting cells. The basal cells proliferate to form immature receptor cells that differentiate to become olfactory
receptor cells. The supporting cells provide both physical
and physiological support to all other cells of this epithelium.
The olfactory receptor cells are first order afferent bipolar
neurons that have a lifespan of about 1–2 months. These
neurons are unique since they are the only nerve cells that
come in direct contact with the environment. It was once
thought that the olfactory receptor cells were the only nerve
cells to retain the capability to regenerate throughout the lifetime of the organism. However, this is challenged by recent
findings that adult neurogenesis also occurs in the dentate
gyrus of the limbic system.
The connective tissue (lamina propria) underlying the
olfactory epithelium contains Bowman’s glands, whose
ducts carry the gland’s aqueous secretion that forms a moist
blanket on the epithelial surface. The remainder of the nasal
mucosa produces a mucus secretion. The apical surface of the
olfactory receptor cells possesses modified cilia, which are
embedded in the mucus secretions. Odorous substances
entering the nasal cavities dissolve in the moist layer of
mucus and interact with receptor molecules embedded in
the plasmalemma of the ciliary membrane, stimulating the
chemosensitive cilia of the olfactory receptor cells. Most of
the flavor that we “taste” in foods is actually the aroma that
passes from the back of the mouth, reaching the superior
recesses of the nasal cavity lined with olfactory epithelium.
Odorous substances entering the nasal cavities dissolve
in the moist mucus layer
overlying the olfactory epithelium. These substances
then interact with odorantbinding proteins immersed in the mucus layer. After diffusing through the mucus layer, the odorous substances interact
with and bind to odorant-receptor protein molecules (transmembrane G-protein-coupled receptors) embedded in the
plasmalemma of the ciliary membrane, where transduction
takes place. Each olfactory receptor cell contains about a
dozen identical receptors (all of them being identical structurally), all of which are coded by one gene. Each olfactory
receptor cell contains only one type of receptor, however this
same type of receptor may also be exhibited by thousands of
other olfactory receptor cells distributed throughout the
olfactory epithelium.
There are about 1,000 distinct olfactory receptors that
make up the largest family of G-protein-coupled receptors.
These receptors function in the detection of a wide range of
odorous molecules. The binding of an odorous substance
to the odorant-receptor protein molecules stimulates the
initiation of a second messenger pathway associated with an
olfactory-specific G-protein, which subsequently stimulates
adenyl cyclase, which generates cAMP. The cAMP elevation
unlocks a cyclic nucleotide-gated cation channel embedded
in the ciliary membrane permitting sodium and calcium
cations to pass into the cell (Fig. 19.2). This stimulates the
chemosensitive cilia of the olfactory receptor cells and a
wave of depolarization (generator potential) is propagated
from the dendrites to the cell body of the olfactory receptor
cell. A high enough depolarization triggers a nerve impulse
that is propagated along the axon of the olfactory receptor
cell, centrally to the olfactory bulb.
Each olfactory receptor cell
gives rise to an unmyelinated centrally directed
axon. They are the slowest
impulse-conducting axons of the central nervous system
(CNS). The axons of these bipolar cells converge and assemble to form 15–20 bundles (fascicles)—the olfactory fila (L.,
“threads”) (Fig. 19.1B). The olfactory fila course superiorly,
traversing the sieve-like perforations of the cribriform plate
of the ethmoid bone of the skull to terminate in the ventral
surface of the ipsilateral olfactory bulb, where they synapse
with second order neurons. Collectively, all the olfactory
fila from each nasal cavity form the olfactory nerve (CN I)
on both respective sides. The olfactory nerve fibers carry
only special visceral afferent (SVA) modality, denoting the
special sense of olfaction. The olfactory receptor cells are
unique not only because they serve the functions of sensory
receptors (chemoreceptors that become activated by chemical
stimuli in their surroundings), transducers (generate graded
potentials), and first order neurons (relaying olfactory sensation centrally to the olfactory bulbs), but also because they
reside in a peripheral structure, the olfactory epithelium,
instead of being housed within a sensory ganglion.
In addition to the sympathetic and parasympathetic
innervation supplying the glands and blood vessels of the
connective tissue, the olfactory mucosa also receives afferent
sensory innervation from the trigeminal nerve. The free
nerve endings of the peripheral trigeminal afferents ramify in
the olfactory epithelium and the underlying lamina propria.
Trigeminal fibers not only mediate pain sensations from
the nasal mucosa, but are also believed to transmit noxious
odor perception to subconscious levels, thus eliciting the
autonomic secretomotor reflex in response to the presence of
noxious chemicals (such as ammonia).
The olfactory bulbs are
two oval-shaped, flattened
structures located on the
basal aspect of the frontal
lobes, that are lodged in two
fenestrated depressions formed by the cribriform plate of the
ethmoid bone in the anterior cranial fossa. The two olfactory
bulbs receive the central processes (axon terminals) of the
first order olfactory receptor cells (see Fig. 19.1A) whose terminations are organized and mapped in an orderly manner.
This is the first relay station of the olfactory system where
synaptic integration occurs (Fig. 19.3). Since the olfactory
bulbs are rostral dilations of the olfactory tracts, which are
outgrowths of the telencephalon rather than typical cranial
nerves, this first relay station of the olfactory system bypasses
the diencephalon and is actually located in the cerebral
cortex. (This situation is contrary to other sensory systems
that normally project to regions of the diencephalon such as
the thalamus, prior to the cortical projection.)
The olfactory bulbs are laminated structures consisting of
five layers surrounding a center of white matter. The layers
are: the olfactory nerve layer, which is the most superficial,
the glomerular layer, the external plexiform layer, the mitral
cell layer, and the deepest layer, the inner plexiform layer
containing granule cells. This laminated cellular architecture
is more clearly defined in animals other than humans, reflecting the exquisite olfactory system that these animals possess.
The center of white matter of the olfactory bulb consists of
afferent fiber terminals (centrifugal afferents), which have
reached the bulb from other brain centers to modulate neural
activity within the bulb, and efferent axons leaving the olfactory bulb via the olfactory tract to reach other cortical areas.
Olfactory receptor cell axons are highly convergent as
they terminate in the glomeruli of the olfactory bulbs.
Glomeruli (Fig. 19.3) are spherical synaptic complexes
where olfactory receptor cell axons establish synapses with
interneurons (the juxtaglomerular, periglomerular cells)
and the main relay second order neurons of the bulb, the
mitral and tufted cells. Each olfactory receptor cell has an
input to several dendritic processes (residing in a glomerulus) of a single mitral or tufted cell. In the rabbit each
glomerulus receives up to a thousand converging olfactory
receptor cell axons. Neural activity involving combinations
of glomeruli is responsible for the perception of a “single”
odor. That is, if several sets of dendrites are stimulated,
the “odor” perceived is different than if only one of those
sets of dendrites is stimulated. The juxtaglomerular and
periglomerular interneurons modulate the transmission of
the sensory afferent information from the olfactory receptor
cells that is communicated to the mitral and tufted cells.
These interneurons also control mitral and tufted cell output
by regulating the stream of signals that reach other brain centers from the olfactory bulb. The olfactory bulbs also receive
centrifugal fibers providing biofeedback input from neurons
residing in other sites of the CNS. Centrifugal afferent fibers
are projected to the olfactory bulb from the locus ceruleus,
the medial and dorsal midbrain raphe nuclei, the medial
septal nucleus, and the nuclei of the diagonal band of Broca.
Each olfactory bulb also receives sensory input from the
olfactory bulb of the opposite side, which is first processed in
the contralateral anterior olfactory nucleus (Fig. 19.4). This
input is believed to adjust the capacity of the second order
neurons and interneurons to respond to incoming signals.
Each olfactory tract arises
from the olfactory bulb,
courses posteriorly, and
diverges to form the medial
and lateral olfactory striae
(tracts) (Fig. 19.4). The two
striae and a small region rostral to the anterior perforated
substance collectively form a triangular-shaped region, the
olfactory trigone.
The principal fibers carried by the olfactory tract are the
efferent axons of second order output neurons of the bulb
—the mitral and tufted cells. Others include the afferent
centrifugal fibers.
Mitral and tufted cells occupying the olfactory bulb send
collaterals to a cortical structure, the ipsilateral anterior
olfactory nucleus located in the vicinity of the junction
between the olfactory bulb and tract (Fig. 19.4). Efferent fibers
arising from neurons of this nucleus accompany the efferent
axons of the mitral and tufted cells coursing in the olfactory
tract. The fibers arising from the anterior olfactory nucleus
project to both olfactory bulbs; some of these fibers project to
the nearby ipsilateral olfactory bulb, whereas others join the
medial olfactory stria and cross via the anterior commissure
to terminate in the contralateral olfactory bulb and anterior
olfactory nucleus. The majority of the fibers coursing in the
medial olfactory stria are derived from neurons housed in the
anterior olfactory nucleus. The medial olfactory stria also
carries fibers from mitral and tufted cells, which terminate in
the ipsilateral anterior perforated substance and the medial
septal nuclei. These nuclei form connections with the limbic
system and are therefore implicated in the emotional and
visceral response to odors (to the great benefit of companies
manufacturing perfumes).
The lateral olfactory stria, consisting primarily of mitral
cell axons, is the main central pathway of the olfactory system. Its second order fibers project mostly to paleocortical
structures.
The lateral olfactory stria,
consisting of second order
fibers, projects mostly to
paleocortical structures and
the amygdala. The paleocortical structures that are targets of
the lateral olfactory stria consist of parts of the primary olfactory cortex (the lateral olfactory gyrus and anterior half of
the uncus, collectively referred to as the “piriform cortex”)
and the periamygdaloid cortex, which forms the rest of
the olfactory component of the uncus and the amygdala
(Fig. 19.5). Some fibers terminate in the lateral olfactory gyrus
(nucleus of the lateral olfactory stria). However, most of the
fibers terminate in the anterior half of the uncus forming part
of the primary olfactory cortex located in the ventromedial
aspect of the temporal lobe. Still other fibers terminate in the
amygdala and the anterior perforated substance. The lateral
olfactory stria also sends collaterals to the anterior olfactory
nucleus and to subcortical limbic structures. The primary
olfactory cortex (consisting of paleocortex) projects to the
dorsomedial nucleus of the thalamus, which in turn projects
mainly to the orbital gyri of the orbitofrontal cortex of the
frontal lobe (the neocortical region of the olfactory system).
However, the primary olfactory cortex also sends direct projections to the neocortex and is the only sensory system
that bypasses the thalamus in projecting to the telencephalon.
The olfactory system neocortical projections terminating in
the orbitofrontal cortex have an important function in the
conscious awareness of odors. The neocortex functions as a
correlating and coordinating center for the vast spectrum of
sensory and motor input it receives from all sensory and
motor systems (Fig. 19.5).
The primary olfactory cortex also projects to the hypothalamus, the amygdala, and the olfactory association
cortex (secondary olfactory cortex, entorhinal cortex) located
next to the primary olfactory cortex. The entorhinal cortex
also receives direct projections from the olfactory tract.
Functionally, the entrorhinal cortex is closely associated with
the hippocampus, affecting memory and emotional behavior.
Projections to the hypothalamus are associated with sexual
and maternal behavior.
Anosmia, the complete loss of the sense of smell, or hyposmia, the partial
loss of the sense of smell, may result following injury to the olfactory apparatus,
ipsilateral to the lesion. These conditions may occur subsequent to head trauma,
especially if there is fracture or damage to the cribriform plate of the ethmoid
bone. In the event that the olfactory bulb becomes dislodged from its normal
position, the delicate first order afferent fibers traversing the fenestrations of
the cribriform plate of the ethmoid bone may be injured or torn. However, since
these bipolar neurons retain the capacity to regenerate, they may successfully
reconnect to the olfactory bulb and restore synaptic contacts in the appropriate
layers of the bulb, resulting in the recovery of function and sense of smell.
Other prevalent conditions such as rhinitis or sinusitis, resulting from irritation and/or swelling of the nasal mucous membrane, may temporarily disrupt olfaction. Moreover, exposure to various contaminants may adversely
affect olfaction. Extensive damage may result in permanent loss of the sense of
smell. Nasal congestion resulting from a cold or viral infection may also affect
the sense of smell. A complete loss of olfaction is usually accompanied by a
partial or complete loss of gustation (taste), as commonly experienced during a
bad cold when the individual is unable to taste food.
Individuals with lesions in the orbitofrontal cortex—the neocortex necessary for conscious awareness of odors—are able to detect the presence of
odors but are unable to distinguish between different odorous substances.
A viral or bacterial infection in the ears, air sinuses, or throat may spread
to the upper recesses of the nasal cavities introducing infectious agents into
the cranial vault. The meningeal membranes may subsequently become
infected spreading the infection to the subarachnoid space and cerebrospinal
fluid, resulting in meningitis, a serious and life-threatening inflammation
of the brain and its surrounding membranes, the meninges. The upper recesses
of the nasal cavity communicate with the cranial vault via perforations of
the cribriform plate of the ethmoid bone, which can serve as a conduit for the
spread of infection, especially following head trauma involving the cribriform
plate.
Individuals diagnosed with Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, or
Huntington’s disease, also experience a deterioration in olfactory function as a
result of degenerating olfactory pathways. Individuals suffering from epilepsy
may perceive odors that are not present or experience parosmia, a distorted
perception of odors.
In this case the etiology of the
patient’s olfactory dysfunction is
obvious: head trauma, which is a very
common cause of olfactory dysfunction.
Its cause is rarely of neurologic origin.
The most common etiologies include
upper respiratory infections, sinus
disease, or any other nasal obstruction
or congestion. Medications can induce
loss of or alteration of the sense of smell.
Neurodegenerative diseases such as
Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease,
or Huntington’s disease are also associated
with loss of olfactory sensation.
Most cases of olfactory loss caused
by head trauma are thought to arise from
shearing injury to the olfactory nerve
fibers as they pass through the cribriform
plate of the ethmoid bone. However, it
can also arise from injury to the olfactory
bulbs, olfactory tracts, or the frontal or
temporal lobes. An individual is often
unaware of unilateral loss of olfactory
sensation in only one nostril but it
becomes noticeable when the lesion is
bilateral. Olfactory dysfunction occurs in
approximately 5–10% of patients with
head trauma.1 Loss of and/or alteration
of the sense of smell can occur. There is
some correlation between the severity of
head trauma and the presence of, or the
degree of, olfactory disturbance.2
Patients with a loss of the sense of
smell often complain of loss of, or
alteration in, taste as well. However,
loss of taste sensation to sweet, sour, salty,
and bitter is much rarer than olfactory
dysfunction. Trigeminal nerve endings
in the nasal membranes detect irritants.
Therefore, to only test olfactory function,
nonirritating substances such as coffee or
vanilla should be used. Ammonia or
vinegar are irritants and can be detected
through the trigeminal nerve endings.
Recovery of normal olfactory function
in cases caused by head trauma is rare.
There is no effective treatment.
A 38-year-old woman complained to her primary care physician of two separate attacks during which
she experienced fear and anxiety. These
occurred suddenly without warning or
precipitation by any circumstance. These
episodes were brief, lasting a minute or
so each. She noted increasing levels of
anxiety and irritability even in between
these attacks. Friends and family were
concerned about her increasingly “odd”
behavior and unprovoked outbursts of
anger. There were brief episodes during
which she became incoherent. There was
concern about panic attacks or even a
more severe psychiatric condition such as
schizophrenia.
The patient had another attack that
was witnessed by a friend. There was a
sudden feeling of fear and anxiety as
in the prior attacks, accompanied by
agitation and crude verbalizations.
This quickly progressed to loss of
responsiveness and convulsive activity
that lasted for less than a minute.
After this episode she had a neurologic
evaluation and testing.
The limbic system consists of a diverse group of structures
including phylogenetically ancient cortical areas, a group of
associated subcortical nuclei, as well as associated pathways
that interconnect regions of the telencephalon, diencephalon,
and brainstem. A major function of the limbic system is to
modulate the hypothalamus.
As a result of its complex nature and widespread connections, the areas considered to constitute the limbic system
are sometimes inconsistent among authors; however, the
structures most commonly included under the limbic system
are the cingulate, subcallosal, parahippocampal, and dentate
gyri, the hippocampus proper, the subiculum, the amygdaloid body, the septal area, and some nuclei of the thalamus
and hypothalamus (Table 20.1). The two main structures of
the limbic system are the hippocampal formation (which
includes the hippocampus proper, the dentate gyrus, and
the subiculum) and the amygdala. The hippocampal formation is involved in the consolidation of short-term memory
into long-term memory, whereas the amygdala regulates
emotional expression via modulation of the hypothalamus.
An emotion (L. emovere, “to disturb”) is an intense subjective
sensation—including anger, distress, excitement, fear, happiness, hate, love, or sadness—that may be felt toward another
individual or an object. The behavioral expression of emotions is usually accompanied by physiological (visceral and/
or somatic) responses.
Associated pathways such as the alveus, fimbria of the
fornix, fornix, perforant pathway, cingulum, septohippocampal
tract, ventral amygdalohypothalamic tract, mammillothalamic tract (mammillary fasciculus), mammillointerpeduncular
tract, mammillotegmental tract, stria terminalis, and stria
medullaris thalami, are also included in the limbic system
(Table 20.1).
The limbic system, which is unique to mammals, functions in: (i) species preservation, which includes reproduction
and associated instinctive behavior; (ii) self-preservation,
which includes feeding behavior and aggression; and (iii)
the expression of fear, motivation, and other emotions, as well
as memory and learning. The limbic system not only exerts
its influence on the expression of emotions, but also via its
extensive connections with the hypothalamus (which integrates the functions of the endocrine and the autonomic
nervous system). This influences the corresponding visceral
responses (i.e., increase in heart rate and breathing, sweating,
etc.), which supplement the expression of emotion.
The limbic system generates the emotional background
for intellect. Furthermore, it serves to balance emotional and
cognitive mechanisms. The limbic system, also referred to
as the “visceral brain,” processes information about a certain
situation and then, via its visceral control, produces visceral
responses. What a person “knows” or “thinks” is mediated
by the neocortex.
Since the limbic system is involved in diverse functions
and consists of intricate interconnections, it is often difficult
to associate a particular component of the limbic system with
a particular function.
The limbic lobe (L. limbus,
“border”) (Fig. 20.1) was
characterized by Broca in
1878 as a composite of cortical structures (“le grand
lobe limbique”) that formed
a transitional border intervening between the centrally positioned diencephalon and
the overlying telencephalon. The limbic lobe consists of the
subcallosal, cingulate, and parahippocampal gyri, as well as
the hippocampal formation, all of which collectively form a
cortical perimeter around the corpus callosum. The subcallosal and parahippocampal gyri consist of neocortex (G. neo,
“new”); the cingulate gyrus consists of mesocortex (G. mesos,
“middle,” “intermediate”); and the hippocampal formation
consists of archicortex (G. archein, “beginning,” “original,”
“primitive”) (Table 20.2). Neocortex is phylogenetically
new, whereas the archicortex consists of ancient cortex. The
mesocortex is a transitional cortex positioned between the
archicortex and neocortex. The limbic lobe is considered to be
a component of the more extensive limbic system.
The subcallosal gyrus consists of gray matter, which
underlies the basal surface of the rostral extent of the corpus
callosum (Fig. 20.1). It curves superiorly around the genu of
the corpus callosum and then extends posteriorly, superior to
the corpus callosum, as the cingulate gyrus. At its posterior
inferior extent, the cingulate gyrus in turn continues as the
parahippocampal gyrus.
The hippocampal formation
consists of three regions, the
hippocampus proper (also
referred to as the hippocampus, Ammon’s horn, or cornu ammonis), the dentate
gyrus, and the subiculum (subicular cortex) (Fig. 20.1; Table
20.3). Structures associated with the hippocampal formation,
via neuroanatomical connections, include the entorhinal
cortex, the supracallosal gyrus (indusium griseum), fasciola
cinerea (gyrus fasciolaris), and the septal area (a primitive
precommissural area). The hippocampal formation extends
from the amygdala anteriorly to the splenium of the corpus
callosum posteriorly. On cross (coronal) section, its intrinsic
structure is most striking in its middle third.
The hippocampal formation consists of archicortex, which
during the early stages of its development scrolls inferiorly
and medially on the floor of the lateral ventricle (Fig. 20.2).
The function of the hippocampal formation in recent memory and learning is well established.
The hippocampus proper (G. hippocampus, “seahorse”) is
a phylogenetically ancient cortical structure that forms a
comma-shaped prominence on the floor and medial wall of
the temporal (inferior) horn of the lateral ventricle. The
hippocampus is an infolding of the cortex of the human
brain, embedded within the parahippocampal gyrus of the
temporal lobe. The ventricular surface of the hippocampus is
coated with an ependymal layer. At its anterior extent, the
hippocampus displays a swelling with several grooves
resembling a paw, and is thus referred to as the pes hippocampus (L. pes, “foot”). The hippocampus extends from
the amygdala anteriorly, and then tapers as it courses
posteriorly to the inferior surface of the splenium of the
corpus callosum.
On coronal section (Fig. 20.3A), the hippocampus appears
similar to a seahorse as a result of its arched form, thus its
name. Due to its C-shaped outline in coronal section, the
hippocampus also resembles a ram’s horn, and is called
Ammon’s horn (cornu ammonis or CA) after an Egyptian
deity with a ram’s head.
When viewed in transverse (coronal) section, the hippocampus (consisting of archicortex), displays three zones: CA1,
CA2, and CA3 (Fig. 20.2C). The hippocampus of the human
brain also consists of an additional zone, CA4. Based on their
cytoarchitectural characteristics, these zones are of importance to researchers. Area CA1 lies next to the subiculum,
whereas CA3 lies close to the dentate gyrus. The hippocampal archicortex consists of three layers: the molecular,
pyramidal, and polymorphic layers (Fig. 20.3A; Table 20.3).
The molecular layer (the deepest layer), which is located in
the core of the hippocampal formation, consists of apical dendritic trees and axon terminals. The apical dendrites belong to
hippocampal pyramidal cells (see below). The axon terminals
belong to granule cells whose cell bodies reside in the granule
cell layer of the dentate gyrus, the perforant pathway arising
in the entorhinal cortex, the septohippocampal tract arising
from the septal area, and the pyramidal cell axon collateral
branches, arising from the pyramidal cell layer of the hippocampus. This layer merges with the molecular layer of the
dentate gyrus and the neocortex.
The pyramidal layer(the middle layer) is the most prominent
layer of the hippocampal formation and consists of pyramidal cells. Their dendrites ramify in the molecular layer,
whereas their axons pass in the opposite direction, across the
polymorphic layer, and then course in the alveus, fimbria,
and the fornix. Pyramidal cell axon collateral branches,
referred to as Schaffer collaterals, cross the polymorphic and
pyramidal layers to reach the molecular layer where they
form synaptic contacts with the dendrites of other pyramidal
neurons. The pyramidal layer of the hippocampal formation
merges with the internal pyramidal layer of the neocortex.
The polymorphic layer (the superficial layer) shares structural characteristics with the deepest layer of the neocortex.
This layer lies deep to the alveus and consists of interneurons,
as well as pyramidal cell dendrites and axon collateral
branches.
The dentate gyrus (L. dentate, “tooth-shaped”) (see Fig. 20.3;
Table 20.3) is a notched band of cortex that is interposed
between the upper aspect of the parahippocampal gyrus and
the fimbria. This gyrus gets its name from its tooth-like
configuration created by numerous blood vessels that pierce
the ventricular surface of the hippocampus and then the
dentate gyrus, which imparts a notched appearance. Dorsally, the dentate gyrus courses along with the fimbria near
the splenium of the corpus callosum where it extends to the
indusium griseum. Anteriorly, the dentate gyrus extends
to the uncus of the parahippocampal gyrus.
Similar to the hippocampus, the dentate gyrus also consists of
three layers of archicortex. They are an outer molecular layer,
a middle granule cell layer (corresponding to the pyramidal
layer of the hippocampus), and a deep polymorphic layer
(see Fig. 20.3B).
The molecular layer of the dentate gyrus archicortex consists
mainly of a small population of nerve cell bodies and granule
cell dendrites.
The granule cell layer consists of the cell bodies of the
granule cells, the most predominant cell type of the dentate
gyrus. The dendritic arborizations of the granule cells ramify
in the molecular layer of the dentate gyrus where they form
synapses with the terminals of the perforant pathway. The
axons of the granule cells (the output neurons of the dentate
gyrus), give rise to collateral branches, then exit the dentate
gyrus, pass into the molecular layer of the hippocampus as
mossy fibers and terminate on the dendrites of the pyramidal
cells of the hippocampus. The hippocampus is the only target
of the dentate gyrus output. A large number of the collateral
branches project to the molecular layer of the dentate gyrus.
An area of the dentate gyrus known as the hilus merges
with the polymorphic layer of the CA3 zone of the hippocampus. The hilus consists of interneurons and granule cell
axons.
A cross-section of the hippocampal formation exhibits a
perceptible double interlocking C. This salient characteristic
of the hippocampal formation results from the interlocking of
the prominent pyramidal layer of the hippocampus proper
and the granule cell layer of the dentate gyrus.
The polymorphic layer of the dentate gyrus archicortex consists of interneurons.
The subiculum is a transitional zone that displays a threelayered archicortex next to the hippocampus, but progressively becomes a more elaborate six-layered neocortex as
it approaches the parahippocampal gyrus. The subiculum
receives information relayed by the hippocampal pyramidal
cells. It gives rise to fibers that join the fornix and terminate in
the mammillary nuclei of the hypothalamus, and the anterior
nuclear group of the thalamus.
The entorhinal cortex (Brodmann’s area 28) is located ventral
to the amygdaloid body and the anterior half of the hippocampal formation. The entorhinal cortex exhibits distinguishing characteristics in two of its layers (layers II and IV) that
are visible at light microscopy level. Layer II contains the cell
bodies of large multipolar neurons that assemble to form
multiple “islands” throughout this layer. Since this layer is
close to the cortical surface, the cell islands protrude from the
surface of the entorhinal cortex, appearing as tiny swellings,
resembling the texture of lemon peel. These swellings are visible grossly. Unlike layer II, layer IV of the entorhinal cortex
includes a dense fiber plexus that forms a distinct boundary
between layer III, containing small pyramidal cells, and layer
V, containing large pyramidal cells.
Widespread areas of the association cortex relay input to
the entorhinal cortex and it is via the entorhinal cortex that
these cortical association areas have access to the hippocampus and play a role in memory consolidation. The entorhinal
cortex gives rise to the most prominent input to the dentate
gyrus of the hippocampal formation via the perforant pathway arising from the lateral part of the entorhinal cortex
and the alvear pathway arising from the medial part of the
entorhinal cortex. These pathways are part of the intrinsic
circuitry of the hippocampal formation.
The indusium griseum (supracallosal gyrus) represents
a portion of the hippocampal formation that remained
attached to the corpus callosum during its development, as the
rest of the hippocampal formation moved laterally, inferiorly,
and then medially to its final position in the temporal lobe
(Fig. 20.4). Dorsally, it curves around the splenium of the
corpus callosum and then merges with the dentate and
parahippocampal gyri by way of the fasciola cinerea. Two
pairs of rudimentary stripes of indusium griseum white
matter, the medial and lateral longitudinal striae arise and
terminate in the hippocampal formation, and course bilaterally along the superior surface of the corpus callosum, lateral
to the indusium griseum.
The fasciola cinerea (gyrus fasciolaris) (L. fasciola, “band;”
cinereus, “ashen-hued”) is a transitional zone of intervening
cortex that joins the dentate gyrus with the indusium griseum
(Fig. 20.5).
The septal area is located in the telencephalon, in close
proximity to the genu of the corpus callosum. This area,
which is well developed in humans, includes the septal
nuclear complex whose nuclei are gathered rostral to the
anterior commissure. The septal nuclei are classified into
two main groups, the medial and lateral septal nuclei, which
are analogous with the deep telencephalic nuclei rather
than the cortex. They are connected with the hippocampal
formation via the fornix, and the hypothalamus via the
medial forebrain bundle. Furthermore, the septal nuclei
send fibers via the stria medullaris thalami to the habenular nucleus.
Afferent fibers to the hippocampus proper arise from the
following sources (Table 20.4): the indusium griseum, cingulate gyrus, septal nuclei, the entorhinal cortex, the dentate
gyrus, the parahippocampal gyrus, and the contralateral
hippocampus.
Efferent fibers of the hippocampus proper (Table 20.4) arise
mostly from the pyramidal cells of its pyramidal cell layer.
Their axons course in the alveus, fimbria, and fornix, which
distributes them to various nuclei. Axons coursing anterior to
the anterior commissure terminate in the septal nuclei, the
lateral preoptic area of the hypothalamus, and the anterior
part of the hypothalamus. Axons coursing posterior to the
anterior commissure are distributed to the mammillary
body, the anterior nuclear group of the thalamus, and the
tegmentum of the mesencephalon. Some hippocampal fibers
terminate in the habenular nuclei. A second pathway, the
hippocampo-entorhino-neocortical pathway, emerges from
the hippocampus proper and follows the perforant path back
to deeper layers of the entorhinal cortex and from there to
the neocortex (Fig. 20.6). This pathway is involved in the
consolidation of episodic memories.
The components of the hippocampal formation (the hippocampus proper, dentate gyrus, and subiculum) serve as
successive processing stations in a series of local projections
within the hippocampal formation. This local circuit consists
of a pathway that arises from the entorhinal cortex.
Although the intrinsic circuitry of the hippocampal formation consists primarily of a closed loop of signal transmission, collateral branches and feedback connections are also
present along this pathway, which serve to modify the relay
of signals within the hippocampal formation (Figs 20.6, 20.7).
Axons arising from the entorhinal cortex (of the parahippocampal gyrus) form the perforant and alvear pathways
(also known as the lateral and medial perforant pathways,
respectively), which end in the molecular layer of the dentate
gyrus, where their fibers synapse with the dendrites of its
granule cells. Furthermore, these axons also send collaterals
to the CA1 and CA3 zones of the hippocampus and the
subiculum. The entorhinal cortex provides the major input to the
hippocampal formation.
The granule cells of the dentate gyrus give rise to axons
referred to as mossy fibers, which project not only to the CA3
zone of the hippocampal formation where they synapse with
pyramidal cells, but also to its own polymorphic layer. The
dentate gyrus polymorphic-layer neurons give rise to fibers
that synapse with the dendrites and cell bodies of the granule
cells, modifying the information relayed by the granule cells.
Note that the dentate gyrus projects only locally, and does not
project outside the hippocampal formation.
The pyramidal cells of the CA3 zone give rise to axons that
join the fimbria. Prior to joining the fimbria, these axons emit
Schaefer collaterals that project within CA3, and to the CA1
zone of the hippocampal formation (to synapse with the
pyramidal cells there), as well as to the septal nuclei.
The pyramidal cells of the CA1 zone send their axons to
the subiculum (subicular cortex). The subiculum in turn projects to the deeper layers of the entorhinal cortex, completing
a closed circuit. The cells in the deeper layers of the entorhinal
cortex in turn give rise to axons that project to the superficial
layers of the entorhinal cortex. The superficial layers of the
entorhinal cortex then give rise to the perforant pathway. The
entorhinal cortex also gives rise to a prominent projection to
neocortical association areas.
Widespread areas of the cerebral cortex project to the
entorhinal cortex, which in turn relays this input to specific
areas of the hippocampal formation. Association (intrinsic)
connections link different areas of the hippocampal formation, whereas commissural fibers link the hippocampal
formation of the two sides.
The Papez circuit was proposed by James Papez in the
1930s as the neuroanatomical basis of emotion. Although it is
known today that the connections of the limbic system are
much more complex, this circuit served as a basis for more
modern research. The Papez circuit consists of the following
anatomical structures: the hippocampus, fornix, mammillary
body, anterior nucleus of the thalamus, mammillothalamic
tract, and cingulate gyrus.
The hippocampal formation sends fibers via the fornix
to the mammillary body, and other nuclei of the hypothalamus. The mammillary body sends the majority of its output
fibers via the mammillothalamic tract to the anterior
nuclear group of the thalamus, which in turn projects to
the cingulate gyrus. The cingulate gyrus projects back via
the cingulum to the hippocampal formation, completing the
circuit. This circuit, though, is not a closed one, since each
relay station has numerous connections with other areas of
the nervous system.
Learning is the manner by which knowledge is acquired,
and memory is the process by which knowledge is stored
and is retrievable in the future. Memory is classified very
broadly into immediate, short-term, and long-term memory.
Newly learned information is initially stored into immediate
or short-term memory, lasting for seconds and minutes,
respectively. Recently learned information, if reinforced,
may be conveyed and stored into long-term memory for a
prolonged period of time, a function which is mediated by
the hippocampal formation. Individuals who have lesions in
the hippocampal formation are unable to transfer immediate
and short-term memory into long-term memory. Learning
and memory processes may be interrupted by trauma,
cerebral anoxia, Alzheimer’s disease, and amnestic confabulatory syndrome (Korsakoff’s syndrome) involving the
hippocampus.
Recent studies indicate that the mechanism by which
short-term memory is assembled/converted into long-term
memory may be long-term potentiation, a form of neuronal
plasticity. Long-term potentiation is a physiological process
that occurs at neuronal synaptic contacts, as follows. When a
neuron transmits a succession of nerve impulses to another
neuron, this persistent/continual stimulation increases the
probability that the target neuron will be depolarized by
this particular synapse and by additional synaptic contacts
established on the target neuron. Depolarization of the target
neuron may be due to a higher chance that neurotransmitter
will be released by the presynaptic terminal and/or an
enhanced response of the postsynaptic terminal. Long-term
potentiation in the hippocampal formation has been established at the axon terminals of the perforant pathway (the
main cortical input pathway to the hippocampal formation
terminating in the dentate gyrus), and at the axon terminals
of the CA3 zone pyramidal cells forming synaptic contacts on
CA1 zone cells. Recall that the perforant pathway consists of
cortical association fibers that emerge from the entorhinal
cortex, and migrate to the molecular layers of the hippocampus and the dentate gyrus, where they synapse with
pyramidal and granule cells, respectively. Long-term potentiation may be the physiological process via which certain
types of memory are formed.
The amygdala (G. amygdalon, “almond”) (Fig. 20.8)
is an almond-shaped group
of nuclei located deep to the
uncus of the parahippocampal gyrus anterior to the hippocampus and the temporal
horn of the lateral ventricle. The amygdala is divided into
three groups of subnuclei (Table 20.5): the large basolateral
(ventrolateral) group, and the smaller corticomedial (dorsomedial) and central groups. The basolateral and corticomedial subnuclei receive afferent fibers, whereas the central
group subnuclei give rise to efferent fibers. Each subnucleus
has different connections and functions.
The amygdala receives sensory input from widespread
areas of the nervous system including somatosensory, visual,
auditory, and visceral (such as olfactory) stimuli.
The corticomedial (dorsomedial) nucleus is the oldest
phylogenetically. This nucleus is the termination of olfactory
fibers arising from the olfactory bulb via the lateral olfactory
stria, and the olfactory cortex. Since this nucleus projects to
the ventromedial nucleus of the hypothalamus, it is believed
to play a role in eating behaviors.
The basolateral (ventrolateral) nucleus is the newest
phylogenetically. It is reciprocally connected to the cortical
sensory association areas of all four lobes (the visual, auditory, and somatosensory systems) and projects to the medial
dorsal nucleus of the thalamus, the basal nucleus (of
Meynart), and the ventral striatum. This nucleus influences
the various functions of the hypothalamus associated with
feeding and drinking behavior, autonomic and somatic
reflexes, and responses to stress.
The basolateral and corticomedial nuclei project to the
central nucleus. This nucleus has reciprocal connections with
the visceral sensory and visceral motor nuclei located in the
brainstem. The central nucleus gives rise to the ventral amygdalofugal pathway, which terminates in the autonomic nervous system nuclei of the brainstem. These include the dorsal
motor nucleus of the vagus, as well as nuclei of the reticular
formation involved in respiratory and cardiovascular
functions.
The amygdala receives afferent (input) fibers from the
following sources (Table 20.6): olfactory bulb, orbitofrontal
cortex, cingulate gyrus, basal forebrain, medial thalamus,
hypothalamus, and brainstem.
One of the principal functions of the limbic system is to modulate hypothalamic activity, and this modulation is mediated
via two main output pathways arising from the amygdala,
which distribute fibers mainly to the hypothalamus, but
also to sources of amygdalar input. These efferent pathways
are: the stria terminalis (which conveys fibers primarily
from the corticomedial nucleus to the septal nuclei and
the hypothalamus) and the ventral amygdalofugal (amygdaloid) pathway (which also conveys input fibers to the
amygdala) (Table 20.6). The latter pathway is less distinct,
and distributes fibers from the central nucleus to the
brainstem as well as fibers from the basolateral nucleus that
terminate in the thalamus, ventral striatum, and basal
nucleus. The signals arising from the striatum are ultimately
relayed to the medial dorsal nucleus of the thalamus, which
in turn projects to the prefrontal and orbitofrontal cortices.
The limbic system projections to the deep cerebral nuclei are
associated with underlying emotional aspects that influence
movement.
One of the key roles of the amygdala is the control of
autonomic nervous system (ANS) function in relation to
previous experiences. ANS modulation is mediated indirectly by reciprocal projections between the amygdala and
the hypothalamus (corticomedial nucleus), which in turn
coordinates ANS activity, and directly via the descending
pathways that arise from the amygdala and terminate in the
brainstem autonomic centers (central nucleus).
The mode of amygdaloid control on ANS function differs
from that of the hypothalamus (without amygdaloid input).
Hypothalamic control of ANS activity is reflex in nature, continuously monitoring the body’s internal environment via
baroreceptors and osmoreceptors, and making appropriate
adjustments, whereas control of ANS activity by the amygdala is mediated by instinct. The amygdala utilizes prior
experiences to modulate ANS activity. The basolateral
nucleus has abundant reciprocal projections with the sensory
association areas of all four lobes and is associated with the
processing of input related to past experiences. In contrast,
the corticomedial nucleus projects to the hypothalamus,
whereas the central nucleus projects to the brainstem. The
amygdala, through its connections with the hypothalamus,
influences the visceral and somatic aspects that correspond to
the behavioral expression of emotion.
Various emotional states initiate intricate psychological,
endocrine, and autonomic
responses. The limbic system
sends numerous projections to the hypothalamic nuclei,
especially the mammillary and preoptic nuclei (Table 20.7).
The hypothalamus in turn mediates ANS (visceral) responses
that accompany the expression of emotions.
The amygdala and hypothalamus project to the “limbic
nuclei” of the thalamus,
which include the anterior
nuclear group and the lateral dorsal and medial
dorsal nuclei of the thalamus (Table 20.7). These nuclei then
relay this information to the limbic lobe. Furthermore, the
hippocampal formation receives afferent fibers from the anterior, lateral dorsal, lateral posterior, and intralaminar nuclei
of the thalamus.
The limbic system projects
to the reticular formation
of the mesencephalon via
a relay in the habenular
nuclei. These nuclei project
to the interpeduncular and raphe nuclei of the mesencephalon via the habenulointerpeduncular tract. Other
habenular efferent fibers terminate in the hypothalamus, the
ventral tegmental area, and the substantia nigra.
The ventral tegmental area of the midbrain modulates the
processing of memory via dopaminergic fibers that terminate
in cortical areas related to the limbic system.
The locus ceruleus sends noradrenergic fibers whereas the
dorsal raphe sends serotonergic fibers to the hippocampal
formation, limbic lobe, and amygdala, where they modulate
the processing of memory.
A number of pathways connect the various components
of, and areas associated with, the limbic system (Tables 20.1,
20.8). They are the alveus, fimbria, fornix, perforant pathway,
cingulum, septohippocampal tract, ventral amygdalohypothalamic tract, mammillothalamic tract (mammillary fasciculus), mammillointerpeduncular tract, mammillotegmental
tract, stria terminalis, stria medullaris (thalami), anterior
commissure, diagonal band of Broca, and habenulointerpeduncular tract.
Deep to the ependymal layer
overlying the ventricular
surface of the hippocampal
formation, there is a fine
layer of white matter, the
alveus (L., “trough,” “canal”). The alveus is composed of a
two-way bundle of myelinated axons, most of which belong
to the pyramidal cells of the hippocampal formation. These
axons gather to become the fimbria (L., “fringe”), which
extends to the subsplenial area inferior to the corpus callosum. At the subsplenial area each hippocampus (right and
left) proceeds as the crus of the fornix (L. crus, “leg;” fornix,
“arch”) (Fig. 20.9). The fornix consists of two crura, one on
each side, which are joined by commissural fibers forming
the commissure of the fornix (hippocampal commissure).
Anterior to the commissure of the fornix, the two crura
approach one another and unite in the midline to become the
body of the fornix. The body of the fornix courses anteriorly
following the inferior edge of the septum pellucidum. At
the level of the interventricular foramen (of Monro) and the
anterior commissure, the fornix becomes arched, proceeding
inferiorly and posteriorly diverging again into the columns
of the fornix. As each column turns inferiorly on each side, it
dives into the lateral wall of the third ventricle and then
enters the mammillary body of the hypothalamus.
At the level of the anterior commissure, the fornix separates into a precommissural part that lies anterior to the
anterior commissure, and a postcommissural part that lies
posterior to the anterior commissure. The precommissural
fibers take their origin primarily from the pyramidal cells of
the hippocampus (although some fibers originate from the
subiculum and entorhinal cortex) and project to the septal
area and basal forebrain. The postcommissural fibers emerge
from the subiculum, and then enter the hypothalamus where
the majority of the fibers project primarily in the mammillary
nucleus. Some fibers also terminate in the thalamus and other
nuclei of the hypothalamus.
The fornix is the main output pathway of the hippocampal
formation relaying information to the hypothalamus and the
septal nuclei. Although most of the axons in the fornix are
efferents to the ipsilateral hypothalamus and the septal area,
some of the fibers are afferents to the hippocampus from various brain centers. In addition, the fornix carries commissural
fibers to the habenular nuclei, and others connecting the
hippocampal formation of the two sides.
Through its connections with the hypothalamus (which
coordinates visceral and endocrine functions) and with the
temporal lobe, the hippocampus can influence emotional
behavior and memory, respectively.
The perforant pathway (see
Figs 20.6, 20.7) is the main
cortical input pathway to
the hippocampal formation.
It consists of cortical association fibers that emerge from the
entorhinal cortex, and migrate to the molecular layers of the
hippocampus and the dentate gyrus, where they synapse
with pyramidal and granule cells, respectively.
The cingulum consists of cortical association fibers located
on the deep aspect of the cingulate gyrus. It transmits
information that interconnects the surrounding neocortex.
The septohippocampal tract carries fibers that arise from
the medial septal nucleus and the nuclei of the diagonal band
of Broca. These fibers join the fornix to terminate in the
hippocampus, dentate gyrus, subiculum, and entorhinal
cortex next to the hippocampal formation.
The ventral amygdalohypothalamic tract is the main projection pathway from the amygdala to the hypothalamus, which
it reaches by traversing the internal capsule.
The mammillothalamic tract is the principal output pathway arising from the hypothalamic mammillary nucleus. It
consists of heavily myelinated axons that terminate in the
anterior nuclear group of the thalamus.
The mammillointerpeduncular tract arises from the mammillary body and terminates in the interpeduncular nucleus.
The mammillotegmental tract arises from the mammillary
body and terminates in the midbrain tegmentum.
Fibers of the stria terminalis take their origin mainly from the
amygdaloid body and terminate in the septal area, the medial
preoptic area of the hypothalamus, and the bed nucleus of the
stria terminalis.
The stria medullaris (thalami) consists of fibers that interconnect the habenular nucleus with the septal nuclei and the
anterior hypothalamus.
The anterior commissure carries decussating fibers transmitting olfactory information between the olfactory bulbs, as
well as information between the parahippocampal gyri.
The diagonal band of Broca consists of fibers that arise from
the parolfactory area and terminate in the periamygdaloid
area in the temporal lobe.
The habenulointerpeduncular tract arises from the habenular nucleus and terminates in the interpeduncular nucleus of
the mesencephalon.
Bilateral lesions of the hippocampus may be produced during a forceful impact
of the anterior poles of the temporal lobes on the greater wings of the sphenoid bone. Injury to the temporal lobes results in the inability to form new
memories.
Studies have shown that the pyramidal neurons in area CA1 of the
hippocampal formation (referred to as Sommer’s sector) are particularly
susceptible to cell injury and death if blood oxygen concentration drops to low
levels. Cell degeneration within CA1 occurs within 3–4 minutes as a consequence of the decrease in oxygen supply that occurs following a cardiac
arrest to individuals who are resuscitated. Injury to the pyramidal cells of the
hippocampal formation results in memory loss.
Bilateral lesion or removal of the medial temporal lobe including the amygdala and most of the hippocampal formation, has been performed in the past
on individuals who have epileptic seizures. The hippocampus has an exceptionally low threshold for epileptic seizures, which may be transmitted to other
parts of the limbic lobe and to the neocortex. Although this surgical treatment
reduces the occurrence of seizures in these individuals, they are unable to learn
anything or to form new memories, a condition referred to as anterograde
amnesia. In addition, removal of the hippocampi results in retrograde
amnesia, a condition in which there is a deficit in more recent memories, but
not of those in the distant past. These findings have led to the conclusion that
the hippocampal formation is necessary in the formation of long-term memories. It is believed that the hippocampus generates the drive and mediates
the translation of short-term into long-term memories, which are stored in the
neocortical association areas (visual association cortex, auditory association
cortex, somatosensory association cortex, etc.).
Alzheimer’s disease is a degenerative disorder of the brain and is the most
common form of progressive dementia in the elderly. Individuals with this
disease are unable to form new memories.
This disease is caused by pathologic alterations, including neurofibrillary
tangles, neuritic plaques, and neuronal degeneration, which appear initially in
the pyramidal cell islands (of layer II) of the entorhinal cortex. From there,
degeneration spreads to the CA1 zone of the hippocampus proper, and then
back to the deeper layers of the entorhinal cortex. Consequently, this neuronal
degeneration hinders the normal flow of information through the hippocampal
formation. Confusion and deficits in executive function occur following further
spread of neurofibrillary tangles to the temporal pole and prefrontal cortex.
Subicular pathology occurs roughly at the same time that neurofibrillary
tangles invade the temporal neocortex.
Amnestic confabulatory syndrome is a disorder that most often results
from thiamin (vitamin B1) nutritional deficiency in chronic alcoholism. Affected
individuals have loss of recent memory, and to compensate for this when they
converse, they make up fictitious information or events to fill in the gaps of
memory loss. Morphological changes are reported in the hippocampal formation, the columns of the fornix, and the mammillary bodies of the hypothalamus. However, the area that exhibits the most drastic modification is the
medial dorsal nucleus of the thalamus.
Experiments performed on monkeys with bilateral temporal lobe lesions, which
included the amygdala as well as the surrounding cortical areas that project to
the amygdala, produced what is referred to as the Klüver Bucy syndrome.
This syndrome, however, is rare in humans, and the following description refers
to the original experimental findings. The most striking behavioral characteristics of this syndrome are: lack of fear and anger in previously wild animals,
docility, changes in feeding behavior, sexual abnormalities, excessive oral curiosity
in examining objects, and visual agnosia (the inability to recognize objects).
This patient initially had symptoms of a psychiatric disturbance
and seemed to display some elements of
psychosis. However, she then had
another episode that began like the
previous attacks but then clearly became
a seizure. The knowledge that she had
a seizure shifts the whole scheme of
diagnostic possibilities. A seizure
work-up was performed, including an
electroencephalogram (EEG) and
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of
the brain.
The EEG showed epileptiform activity
coming from the left anterior temporal
region. The MRI revealed an astrocytoma
in the left anteromedial temporal lobe.
The patient underwent resection of the
tumor. There were subsequently no more
seizures and many, but not all, of her
other psychological symptoms improved.
Psychological symptoms are very
common in epilepsy. They often occur
as an aura preceding the onset of more
characteristic manifestations of seizure.
However, the aura in this case is
actually the beginning of the seizure.
Fear, anxiety, anger, disorientation,
bizarre behavior, altered perception, a
feeling of déjà vu, and agitation are some
of the more common manifestations.
Psychological or emotional symptoms are
associated with temporal lobe seizures,
especially involving the anteromedial
temporal lobe, and sometimes frontal
lobe seizures. In fact, the most
epileptogenic regions of the brain are the
temporal and frontal lobes, especially
the limbic regions. Thus epilepsy
with emotional or psychological
manifestations is occasionally confused
with psychiatric disease.
Patients with epilepsy, especially
temporal lobe epilepsy, sometimes
display bizarre behaviors or personality
or have psychological disturbances even
between the seizures. This can occur in
patients with lesions, such as tumors,
in specific regions of the brain or even in
patients without such lesions. This leads
to the hypothesis that the temporal lobe,
specifically the medial temporal lobe,
may be structurally or physiologically
abnormal even if no lesion is detected
there.
Very fine resolution MRI imaging of
the temporal lobes, using coronal images,
often shows medial temporal sclerosis
in those with chronic temporal lobe
epilepsy. This shows up as subtle
scarring and loss of volume of the
parahippocampal gyri. There is a
loss of neurons and gliosis in the
hippocampus and to a variable degree
in the surrounding structures.
A 23-year-old woman complains of daytime sleepiness and
poor sleep at night. Sometimes she has an
uncontrollable urge to sleep during the
daytime. When she feels sleepy, she takes
5–15-minute naps and feels somewhat
refreshed upon awakening. These
episodes occur a few times per week. She
has also noticed that occasionally her
body feels somewhat limp and her head
drops. These episodes last only a few
seconds and seem to be prompted by
laughing, getting very angry, or excited.
A few times she has noticed brief
episodes of complete paralysis while
lying in bed at night prior to falling
sleep. Sometimes she has strange
and occasionally frightening visual
hallucinations before she drifts off to
sleep at night. She usually wakes up a
few times each night. Her most disabling
symptom is the daytime sleepiness,
which interferes with her ability to
concentrate. These symptoms began
several years ago. Family history is
negative. She is not taking any
medications or drugs.
The general physical and neurologic
exam is normal. MRI of the brain is
normal.
The hypothalamus, a subdivision of the diencephalon,
weighs approximately 4 g, and forms less than 1% of the
brain’s total weight. Although this small region of the brain
may seem trivial, it is, on the contrary, the center of numerous, and various, very important functions associated with
the survival of the organism, and continuation of the species.
The hypothalamic functions that are crucial to the survival
of the organism include the control of appetite, fluid balance, electrolyte balance, glucose concentration, metabolism,
sleeping, and body temperature regulation. In addition,
hypothalamic function is associated with the continuation
of the species, since it plays a role in sexual behavior. The
hypothalamus mediates these functions by integrating the
functions of the endocrine, autonomic (visceral motor),
somatic motor, and limbic systems.
The hypothalamus maintains homeostasis, a state of constant internal environment (physiological equilibrium), and
responds to both neural and non-neural stimulation. The
hypothalamus consists of a group of nuclei each playing a
role in one or more of the above functions. Some nuclei
consist of neurons that receive and respond to neural input
from widespread areas of the nervous system. Other nuclei
consist of neurons that respond to non-neural input, such
as fluctuations in the temperature, osmotic pressure, and
hormone levels of the circulating blood. During stressful situations, however, this state of equilibrium may be disturbed.
The body is equipped with receptors that detect changes in
various physiological systems. The hypothalamus in turn,
through its connections with the endocrine, autonomic, and
limbic systems, mediates corrective mechanisms that compensate for the imbalance, and aid the body in restoring
physiological equilibrium. Furthermore, through its extensive interconnections with the limbic system, the hypothalamus plays an important role in memory and emotional
behavior, and mediates the appropriate visceral responses,
such as changes in heart rate and blood pressure, accompanying behavioral expression. For example, an individual who is
feeling anxious, experiences an increase in heart rate and
breathing.
The following structures
form the borders of the
hypothalamus (Figs 21.1,
21.2): anteriorly, from superior to inferior, the anterior
commissure, lamina terminalis, and optic chiasma; posteriorly, the interpeduncular fossa; superiorly, the hypothalamic
sulcus; inferiorly, the tuber cinereum (L., “gray swelling”),
medially, the third ventricle, and laterally, the substantia
innominata, subthalamic nucleus, and internal capsule.
The hypothalamus is divided sagittally from medial to lateral
into periventricular, medial, and lateral zones for descriptive purposes (Table 21.1). Two prominent, heavily myelinated fiber bundles associated with the hypothalamus—the
mammillothalamic tract and the column of the fornix—form
a conspicuous boundary between its medial and lateral zones
(Fig. 21.3).
The periventricular zone is
located next to the midline,
and consists of numerous,
rather small, and difficult to
delineate nuclei that line the wall of the third ventricle along
the anterior–posterior extent of the hypothalamus. The nuclei
of this zone are the periventricular, suprachiasmatic, and
arcuate nuclei (Figs 21.4B, 21.5). The periventricular and
arcuate nuclei control the functions of the anterior pituitary
gland (adenohypophysis), which synthesizes and releases
various endocrine hormones into the bloodstream.
The suprachiasmatic nucleus functions in the control of
circadian rhythms, and is referred to as the “master clock”
of the body.
The nuclei located in this
zone are in an approximate anterior to posterior
sequence, the medial preoptic, anterior hypothalamic,
paraventricular, supraoptic, dorsomedial, ventromedial,
mammillary, and posterior hypothalamic nuclei (Figs
21.4–21.7). The nuclei in this zone control the functions of the
autonomic nervous system and the secretory activity of the
posterior pituitary gland (neurohypophysis).
The lateral zone contains
the lateral preoptic nucleus
anteriorly, the lateral tuberal
nuclei in the tuberal region,
and the lateral hypothalamic nucleus, which extends throughout the anterioposterior
extent of the lateral zone (Figs 21.4–21.7). In addition, this
area also contains the longitudinally oriented fibers of the
medial forebrain bundle. This zone contains nuclei that
receive information from the limbic system and mammillary
bodies and then relay this input to other hypothalamic nuclei
and the brainstem. This zone plays an important role in the
behavioral expression of emotions.
In general, the hypothalamic
nuclei are often difficult to
identify since their boundaries are not sharply delineated from adjacent nuclei,
as they are in other parts of the central nervous system
(CNS). In order to define their location more precisely, the
hypothalamus is, in addition to being divided sagittally into
three mediolateral zones, further divided coronally into four
regions in a rostrocaudal sequence. These four regions, which
are located near three prominent anatomical structures
visible on the ventral surface of the brain (the optic chiasma,
tuber cinereum, and mammillary bodies), are the preoptic
region, supraoptic (chiasmatic or anterior) region, tuberal
(infundibular or middle) region, and mammillary (posterior) region. Each of these regions contains nuclei as
described below; however, some nuclei may extend into the
adjacent zones and regions (see Table 21.1).
The preoptic region, although located at least in part
anterior to the lamina terminalis in the telencephalon,
has been accepted in recent years as the anterior telencephalic
portion of the hypothalamus (which is a diencephalic structure). It consists of gray matter located in the anteriormost
extent of the third ventricle, both anterior and posterior to the
plane of the lamina terminalis. Due to the similarities of its
connections and functions to those of the anterior part of the
medial region of the hypothalamus, the preoptic area is
grouped with the anterior hypothalamus.
The preoptic area extends into the periventricular, medial,
and lateral zones. It contains the preoptic and periventricular nuclei in the periventricular zone, the medial preoptic
nucleus in the medial zone, and the lateral preoptic nucleus
in the lateral zone.
The preoptic region controls the release of reproductive
hormones from the adenohypophysis. There is sexual dimorphism evident in this region, reflecting the different function
it has in the male and female. In the female, the anterior pituitary gland releases gonadotropin hormones that ultimately
regulate the menstrual cycle, whereas in the male, the pituitary releases gonadotropins continually.
The supraoptic region is
located dorsal to the optic
chiasma, is continuous rostrally with the preoptic area,
and contains six nuclei. They
are, from medial to lateral, the suprachiasmatic and periventricular nuclei in the periventricular zone, the anterior
hypothalamic, paraventricular, and supraoptic nuclei in the
medial zone, and the lateral hypothalamic nucleus in the
lateral zone.
The suprachiasmatic nucleus is a small nucleus located
next to the midline, dorsal to the optic chiasma, adjacent to
the third ventricle. This nucleus receives visual information
via axons arising from the retina (retinohypothalamic fibers)
as they course through the optic chiasma, and functions in the
control of circadian rhythms. This nucleus is referred to as the
“master clock” of the body.
The anterior hypothalamic nucleus (see Fig. 21.4B) is
located dorsal to the supraoptic nucleus, and is involved in
temperature regulation.
The paraventricular and supraoptic nuclei (see Figs 21.4B,
21.5A) have the most abundant blood supply in the brain.
The neurons of these two conspicuous nuclei synthesize the
neurohypophyseal hormones, antidiuretic hormone (ADH)
and oxytocin. These hormones are transported via axons
arising from neurons housed in these nuclei to the posterior
lobe (neurohypophysis) of the pituitary gland. These unmyelinated axons gather to form the supraopticohypophyseal
(hypothalamohypophyseal) tract, which courses in the
infundibular stalk, and then terminate in the neurohypophysis. The paraventricular nucleus controls water balance by
functioning in the conservation of water.
In addition to the magnocellular cell group, which projects
to the neurohypophysis, the paraventricular nucleus also
houses other groups of neurons. One of these groups of cells,
the parvocellular group, projects to the median eminence,
whereas another group of cells projects to the reticular formation and the autonomic centers of the brainstem and spinal
cord.
The tuberal region is located
dorsal to the tuber cinereum
and contains the following main nuclei. They are
the arcuate (infundibular)
nucleus in the periventricular zone, the dorsomedial and ventromedial nuclei in the
medial zone, and the lateral hypothalamic nucleus in the
lateral zone.
The arcuate (infundibular) nucleus is located in the
periventricular zone, in the tuber cinereum, arching under
the ventral aspect of the third ventricle. The cells of this
nucleus produce hypothalamic-releasing hormones, and their
axons form the tuberohypophyseal tract that caries these
hormones to the infundibulum, where they pass into the
hypophyseal portal system. The hypophyseal portal system
in turn controls anterior pituitary gland (adenohypophyseal)
hormone release into the general circulation.
The dorsomedial nucleus, when stimulated, produces
aggressive behavior in animals. The ventromedial nucleus is
a “satiety center,” which upon stimulation results in satiety.
This nucleus contains cells that are sensitive to blood glucose
levels, and which are believed to monitor caloric intake.
The lateral hypothalamic nucleus is involved in the
control of appetite. When stimulated, it induces eating.
The mammillary region
includes the prominent
mammillary nuclei and the
posterior hypothalamic
nucleus.
Three to four mammillary nuclei collectively form each mammillary body. The
mammillary bodies appear as two conspicuous elevations on
the ventral surface of the hypothalamus. Unlike the other
hypothalamic nuclei, which are associated with functions
of the endocrine and/or autonomic nervous systems, the
mammillary nuclei are a major target projection area of the
hippocampal formation via the fornix, relaying input related
to emotions. In addition, information is relayed to the mammillary nuclei via the mammillary peduncle from the dorsal
and ventral tegmental nuclei as well as from the raphe nuclei. The mammillary nucleus relays input to the anterior
nucleus of the thalamus via the prominent mammillothalamic tract.
The posterior hypothalamic nucleus contains cells that
are sensitive to a decrease in the temperature of the blood.
This nucleus serves as a “thermostat” and regulates body temperature by conserving heat and stimulating heat production.
Heat is conserved by vasoconstriction of cutaneous vessels,
whereas heat is produced by an increase in thyroid activity
and shivering.
The hypothalamus is connected with widespread regions
of the nervous system. It receives input related to emotion
from the limbic system, as well as input from sensory and
motor nuclei from the brainstem and spinal cord. The hypothalamus exerts its influence via its outputs on the endocrine
and autonomic nervous systems.
The hypothalamus receives
afferent fibers (neural input)
from various structures,
however most neural input
arises from the limbic system. Other fibers arise from visceral structures and the
brainstem. Fibers arise from the following sources: the
orbitofrontal cortex, basal forebrain, septal area and septal
nuclei, ventral striatum, midline and medial dorsal nucleus
of the thalamus, hippocampus, amygdaloid nuclear complex,
retina, dorsal and ventral tegmental nuclei, raphe nuclei,
locus ceruleus, spinal cord, and reticular formation.
In addition to the neural input, the hypothalamus
also receives non-neural input from the vascular system.
Hypothalamic neurons serve as receptors that are sensitive to rapid changes in the temperature, osmotic pressure,
and hormone levels of the circulating blood. These receptors are referred to as circumventricular organs (CVOs).
Although there are six circumventricular organs, only two
are associated with the hypothalamus. They consist of
hypothalamic neurons that are embedded in the wall of
the third ventricle, and are sensitive to alterations in the
chemical composition of the cerebrospinal fluid. One of
these structures is associated with the lamina terminalis,
and is referred to as the organum vasculosum of the lamina
terminalis (OVLT). The OVLT is a chemosensory structure
that detects and responds to peptides and macromolecules
present in the bloodstream. The other CVO is the subfornical organ located inferior to the fornix, near the interventricular foramen. The subfornical organ serves in the
regulation of body fluids. The fenestrated capillaries supplying these receptors do not have a blood–brain barrier, thus
they permit substances present in the bloodstream to pass
through and enter the extracellular space surrounding the
receptor cells.
Most hypothalamic output
projections terminate in the
sources of hypothalamic
input. The hypothalamus
projects efferent fibers (neural output) to the following structures: the septal area and
septal nuclei, medial dorsal nucleus of the thalamus, anterior
nucleus of the thalamus, hippocampus, amygdaloid nuclear
complex, midbrain reticular formation, and brainstem and
spinal cord autonomic nuclei.
In addition to the neural output, the hypothalamus
also provides output to the adenohypophysis and neurohypophysis. The hypothalamus exerts its influence on the
endocrine system via these two projections.
Hypothalamic influence is exerted on the endocrine system directly, via the fibers of the supraopticohypophyseal
tract, which terminates in the posterior lobe of the hypophysis (neurohypophysis). There these neurons release
hormones that pass into the capillaries of the neurohypophysis and then enter the bloodstream.
The hypothalamus also exerts its influence on the
endocrine system indirectly, via the local capillary networks
of the hypophyseal portal system, which carries hormones
synthesized by the hypothalamus to the adenohypophysis
(anterior pituitary gland).
The pathways connecting the hypothalamus with other
regions of the nervous system are categorized into afferent
or efferent pathways based on the direction of most of the
information that they carry. However, none of them carry
exclusively afferent or efferent fibers since they all carry
information that is bidirectional (Tables 21.2–21.4).
The fornix is a myelinated tract that arises from the
hippocampal formation of the limbic system and conveys
the most prominent neural input to the hypothalamus. It
distributes fibers to the preoptic and anterior areas of
the hypothalamus, and then proceeds through the hypothalamus to terminate mostly in the medial nucleus of the
mammillary body posteriorly.
he mammillary peduncle carries prominent sensory
input from the dorsal and ventral tegmental nuclei of the
mesencephalon as well as from the raphe nuclei to the lateral
mammillary nucleus.
The stria terminalis (amygdalohypothalamic fibers) transmits information from the amygdaloid nuclear complex
to the medial preoptic area and the anterior nucleus of the
hypothalamus. This pathway transmits olfactory information, which is believed to affect reproductive behavior.
The thalamohypothalamic tract carries fibers from the
medial dorsal and midline nuclei of the thalamus to the
lateral preoptic area of the hypothalamus.
The ventral amygdalohypothalamic tract relays amygdaloid
signals from the basolateral nucleus to the lateral hypothalamic nucleus where they influence autonomic nervous
system activities.
The retinosuprachiasmatic tract consists of a bundle of fibers
arising from the retina that terminates in the suprachiasmatic
nucleus of the hypothalamus. It is involved in the control of
circadian rhythms.
The spinohypothalamic fibers, a component of the anterolateral system of the ascending sensory pathways, consist
of axons arising from the spinal cord that relay nociceptive
input to the autonomic control centers of the hypothalamus.
There they synapse with neurons that give rise to the
hypothalamospinal tract, which is associated with the
autonomic and reflex responses (i.e., endocrine and cardiovascular responses) to nociception.
Most of the nociceptive fibers from the spinal cord ascending
in the anterolateral system of the ascending sensory pathways, and the fibers of the trigeminothalamic tract, send
collateral branches to the reticular formation as they ascend
through the brainstem. There these collateral branches
activate the ascending reticular activating system (ARAS),
which relays information to the cerebral cortex alerting the
individual, but also relays information to the hypothalamus, limbic system, and serotonergic raphe nucleus magnus. The
hypothalamus mediates the autonomic and reflex responses
to nociception, the limbic system mediates the emotional/
behavioral responses to nociception, and the raphe nucleus is
involved in descending control of pain.
The fasciculus mammillaris princeps arises from the
mammillary body and then quickly bifurcates to give rise to
the mammillothalamic and mammillotegmental tracts.
The mammillothalamic tract is a myelinated bundle of fibers
that arises from the medial and lateral mammillary nuclei
and terminates in the anterior nucleus of the thalamus.
The mammillotegmental tract is a component of the medial
forebrain bundle. It carries mammillothalamic tract axon
collaterals from the lateral mammillary nuclei to the midbrain
dorsal and ventral tegmental nuclei in the reticular formation.
The mammillointerpeduncular tract carries fibers from the
mammillary nucleus that terminate in the interpeduncular
nucleus. The interpeduncular nucleus plays a role in the
sleep–wake cycle.
The supraopticohypophyseal tract is a short tract consisting
of axons that carry oxytocin or vasopressin, synthesized in
the cell bodies of hypothalamic neurons residing in the
supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei, to the posterior lobe of
the pituitary.
Oxytocin and vasopressin are synthesized in different
populations of hypothalamic neurosecretory neurons. The
secretory substances are transported via these axons to the
posterior lobe of the pituitary gland (neurohypophysis).
Upon stimulation, the hypothalamic neurosecretory cells
transmit impulses to their terminals, which results in the
release of the hormones into the general circulation.
The periventricular bundle consists of fibers that connect the
periventricular zone nuclei with the frontal cortex, the dorsal
motor nucleus of the vagus in the medulla, the lateral cell column at T1 to L2, and the sacral parasympathetic nucleus of
the spinal cord. The functions of the projections to the brainstem and spinal cord are autonomic system responses.
The tuberohypophyseal tract carries fibers from the arcuate
and periventricular nuclei to the infundibular stalk and
the anterior pituitary. The axon terminals of the tuberohypophyseal tractrelease “releasing hormones” or “releaseinhibiting hormones” in the hypophyseal portal system,
which carries them to the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland
where they regulate the synthesis and release of anterior
pituitary hormones. The tuberohypophyseal tract and the
hypophyseal portal system serve as a connection between the
hypothalamus and anterior pituitary gland.
The dorsal longitudinal fasciculus carries fibers that connect
various regions of the CNS. Among these fibers are some
that arise from the hypothalamus and descend to terminate in
the brainstem and spinal cord autonomic nuclei. In addition,
this pathway carries signals from the hypothalamus to the
reticular formation. These signals are then relayed via the
reticulobulbar tract to the brainstem lower motoneurons,
and via the reticulospinal tract to the spinal cord lower
motoneurons. By way of the dorsal longitudinal fasciculus,
the hypothalamus ultimately influences chewing, swallowing, and shivering.
The hypothalamospinal tract carries fibers arising mainly
from the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus. Additional fibers originate from the dorsomedial, ventromedial,
and posterior nuclei. These fibers descend to terminate in
the brainstem and spinal cord to synapse directly with preganglionic sympathetic (lateral cell column) and parasympathetic (sacral) nuclei neurons. These direct projections
to the spinal cord are small in number; the majority of the
descending fibers from the hypothalamus that are destined to
influence the autonomic centers are believed to synapse at
multiple relay centers.
The medial forebrain bundle is not really a distinct bundle as
its name implies, but instead consists of a vast array of axons
with various origins and terminations. It includes both afferent and efferent fibers to and from the hypothalamus. The
afferent fibers to the hypothalamus arise primarily from
the septal area. Other fibers arise from the basal forebrain
and primary olfactory cortex, as well as from the brainstem
raphe nuclei, ventral tegmental area, and locus ceruleus.
Efferent fibers arising from the hypothalamus and running
in the medial forebrain bundle terminate in the septal area,
septal nuclei, and brainstem reticular formation and autonomic nuclei, as well as in the autonomic nuclei of the
spinal cord. These fibers are believed to play a role in
motivation and sense of smell. The medial forebrain bundle is
more prominent in other animals with a keen sense of
smell.
The stria medullaris thalami carries afferent and efferent
fibers to and from the hypothalamus, connecting its supraoptic nucleus and preoptic area with the habenula. The
habenula is visible in a midsagittal section of the brain, in the
medial surface of the thalamus near its caudal end. It appears
as a small swelling rostral to the pineal gland, above the
posterior commissure. It contains the habenular nuclei and
its function is not known.
The hypothalamus functions in the regulation of body
temperature, food intake, fluid intake, and control of the
autonomic nervous system (Table 21.5). It also plays a role in
emotional expression, memory, and aggression.
Temperature-sensitive receptors (thermosensitive
free nerve endings) located
in the skin detect information about the environmental temperature. Other peripheral temperature-sensitive
receptors (similar to those in the skin but located deep in the
body) detect information about the body’s core temperature.
Both environmental and body core (visceral) temperature
input is relayed to higher brain centers, including the
hypothalamus, via the ascending sensory pathways.
In addition to the peripheral temperature-sensitive receptors, the preoptic region and anterior hypothalamic nuclei
house two types of temperature-sensitive (thermosensitive)
neurons that respond to very slight temperature changes
(less than 0.1°C) of the blood. One group of these neurons
becomes stimulated by increases in blood temperature,
whereas another group of neurons becomes stimulated by
decreases in blood temperature.
The hypothalamus is a well vascularized brain center. As
the circulating blood percolates in the capillary bed surrounding the thermosensitive preoptic and anterior hypothalamic
neurons, these neurons become stimulated by warming or
cooling of the blood. It is believed that the preoptic and
anterior hypothalamic nuclei initiate heat loss mechanisms,
whereas the posterior hypothalamic nuclei activate heat conservation and heat production mechanisms (Table 21.5). Thus
the hypothalamus serves as a “thermostat” that mediates
mechanisms that enable the body to return to, and maintain,
a normal body temperature.
Temperature regulation involves hypothalamic integration of autonomic, endocrine, somatic motor, and limbic system activities. For example, in response to an increase in body
temperature, the anterior hypothalamus triggers the appropriate body responses that will result in a decrease in body
temperature. These responses include autonomic activities
such as sweating and cutaneous vasodilation, and a decrease
in somatic motor function. Furthermore, behavioral changes
such as seeking a cooler environment or taking off a sweater
to reduce body temperature may be appropriate. The
neurons that control the parasympathetic nervous system
are located in the anterior nucleus of the hypothalamus to
mediate the parasympathetic responses associated with
decreasing body temperature.
In response to a decrease in body temperature, the posterior hypothalamus triggers the appropriate body responses
that will produce an increase in body temperature. These
responses include: (i) piloerection (formation of goose bumps)
and the vasoconstriction of cutaneous vessels, both of which
are mediated by the autonomic nervous system to conserve
body heat; (ii) an increase in metabolism (via the release of
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) by the anterior lobe of
the pituitary), mediated by the endocrine system to increase
body heat; (iii) shivering, mediated by the somatic motor
system to produce heat; and (iv) behavioral (motivational)
responses, such as turning the heat on, putting on warmer
clothes, and drinking something warm, mediated by the limbic
system to increase body temperature. Frontal lobe connections
to the limbic system mediate behavioral changes to optimize
conditions for homeostasis. The neurons that control the
sympathetic nervous system are located in the posterior
hypothalamic nucleus. These neurons send their axons to the
lateral horn of the spinal cord to mediate the sympathetic
responses associated with increasing body temperature.
While body temperature may be regulated by the hypothalamus and associated physiological processes, the temperature range in which these processes are effective is rather
slight. For example, the hypothalamus cannot keep the body at
a normal temperature range in an extremely cold environment.
In the past, the lateral and
ventromedial nuclei of the
hypothalamus were believed
to be associated with eating
behavior. Stimulation of the lateral hypothalamic nucleus in
experimental animals induced eating, and it was referred to
as a “hunger” or “feeding center.” Stimulation of the ventromedial nucleus inhibited eating, and was referred to as a
“satiety center.” It is now known that things are not as simple
as were once believed. In addition to the lateral and ventromedial nuclei, the paraventricular nucleus also plays a
role in the regulation of food intake (Table 21.5), possibly
through its projections to the brainstem reticular formation,
as well as to the brainstem and spinal cord autonomic nuclei.
However, the precise mechanism of food intake regulation is
unknown.
The lateral hypothalamic nucleus contains a group of
neurons that synthesize orexins (G. orexis, “appetite”)
(also referred to as hypocretins), which are hypothalamic
neuropeptides that not only regulate food intake but also
the sleep–wake cycle. Fasting causes an increase in orexin
synthesis, whereas administration of exogenous orexin
induces eating. Orexin is also involved in waking and keeping an individual awake throughout the day. At night,
hypothalamic orexin production decreases, causing an individual to fall asleep.
A group of cells located lateral to the lateral nucleus of
the hypothalamus, known as
the zona incerta, are believed to play a role in water intake.
Stimulation of the zona incerta results in the drinking of large
amounts of water.
The hypothalamus receives
visceral input via the ascending sensory system and
input related to emotions from the limbic system. The
hypothalamus in turn exerts its influence on both the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems, coordinating
their functions in order to maintain homeostasis or to produce the appropriate visceral responses that accompany
behavioral expression.
Stimulation of the anterior (preoptic and anterior
nucleus) and medial hypothalamus controls the activities
of the parasympathetic nervous system (see Table 21.5).
Parasympathetic responses include: pupillary constriction,
increase in salivary secretion, decrease in heart rate and
blood pressure, increase in intestinal peristaltic waves,
vasodilation, sweating, piloerection, and urinary bladder
contraction.
Stimulation of the posterior and lateral hypothalamus
controls the activities of the sympathetic nervous system.
Sympathetic responses include: pupillary dilation, decrease
in salivary secretion, increase in heart rate and blood
pressure, decrease of peristaltic waves, vasoconstriction of
cutaneous blood vessels, and urinary bladder relaxation.
Although fibers destined for the control of autonomic
centers (sympathetic and parasympathetic) of the brainstem
and spinal cord arise from various hypothalamic nuclei, the
principal source of these hypothalamic descending fibers
is the parvocellular part of the paraventricular nucleus.
Interestingly, some of the paraventricular neurons project to
both parasympathetic and sympathetic centers.
It is important to realize that fibers arising from the
anterior and medial hypothalamic nuclei pass posteriorly
and laterally on their way to the brainstem and spinal cord.
Thus stimulation of the posterior and lateral hypothalamus
may not only stimulate the local neurons that project to the
sympathetic centers, but also those fibers arising from the
anterior and medial hypothalamus that pass by the posterior
and lateral hypothalamus, which are destined for the parasympathetic centers.
Fibers arising from the posterior and lateral hypothalamus synapse with the preganglionic sympathetic neurons
at the T1 to L2 levels of the spinal cord to elicit the appropriate sympathetic responses. Fibers arising from the anterior
and lateral hypothalamus synapse with the parasympathetic
neurons at the Edinger–Westphal nucleus, the superior and
inferior salivatory nuclei, the dorsal motor nucleus of the
vagus, and the S2–S4 parasympathetic nucleus to elicit the
appropriate parasympathetic responses.
Emotions trigger the relay of
a heavy input from the limbic system to the hypothalamus. The hypothalamus in
turn, via its connections with
the autonomic nervous system, mediates the appropriate visceral responses (such as changes in heart rate, blood pressure,
breathing rate, and sweating) accompanying behavioral
expression. For example, a student who is feeling anxious
before an examination, may experience an increase in heart
rate, breathing rate, have sweaty palms, and a dry mouth, all
of which are responses mediated by the sympathetic nervous
system. The magnitude of the visceromotor responses to
emotions depends on the individual, his prior experiences,
and his ability to control his emotions and the consequent
visceral responses at the neocortical level.
The hippocampus, a region involved in learning and
memory, gives rise to a prominent fiber bundle, the fornix,
which among other targets, projects to the mammillary bodies of the hypothalamus. Hippocampal input to the hypothalamus is involved in the influence of memories on emotion.
Stimulation of the lateral hypothalamus not only induces
eating and drinking behaviors in animals, but also causes the
animal to become more active, and even exhibit aggressive
behavior or rage. Stimulation of the ventromedial nuclei of
the hypothalamus and surrounding areas produces satiety
and tranquility.
The hypothalamus regulates
pituitary gland functions.
Hypothalamic influence on
the pituitary gland, and ultimately on the endocrine system,
travels via two paths: a neural path and a non-neural (vascular) path. The pituitary gland (also known as the hypophysis), consists of two lobes, the anterior and posterior lobes.
The anterior lobe is also referred to as the adenohypophysis
(G. adena, “gland”) due to its glandular properties, whereas
the posterior lobe is also referred to as the neurohypophysis
due to its neural properties.
Hypothalamic influence on the pituitary gland, and
ultimately on the endocrine system, travels via two paths: a
neural path and a non-neural vascular path.
In the neural path, hypothalamic control is exerted on the
neurohypophysis via a neural pathway, the hypothalamohypophyseal (supraopticohypophyseal, neurohypophyseal)
tract. The axon terminals of this pathway release hormones in
the extracellular space, which then pass directly into fenestrated capillaries of the posterior pituitary, which in turn
empty into the general circulation (Fig. 21.8).
In the non-neural path, hypothalamic control is exerted
on the adenohypophysis via a vascular network, the
hypothalamic portal system. This path involves the release
of hypothalamic hormones into the hypophyseal portal system, a vascular network confined to the hypothalamopituitary region, which connects the hypothalamic and pituitary
vascular beds, and which carries these hormones to the anterior pituitary. The appropriate cells of the anterior pituitary
then release hormones into the general circulation (Fig. 21.9).
The supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei of the
medial zone of the hypothalamus house the large cell
bodies of hypothalamic neurosecretory cells (Fig. 21.10).
These cells are neurons since
they have both the morphological characteristics of neurons
and upon stimulation transmit nerve impulses down their
axons. In addition, these cells also have endocrine properties
since they produce hormones (not neurotransmitters) that
are released into the bloodstream. Thus they are considered
to be specialized neurons.
The profuse vascularization of the hypothalamus enables
the neurosecretory cells of the supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei to sample the osmolarity of the blood flowing
through the hypothalamus. The neurosecretory cells are
stimulated even by a slight increase of osmotic pressure in the
blood, which triggers the relay of nerve impulses down their
axons.
The neurosecretory cells synthesize two peptide hormones, antidiuretic hormone (ADH, also known as vasopressin) and oxytocin. Only one of these hormones is
synthesized by any one (large) cell, and both hormones are
synthesized by the (large) cells of both nuclei. Each of these
hormones is synthesized as a prohormone in the cell body
of the neurosecretory cells. Each of these hormones then
becomes bound to a carrier protein known as a neurophysin
and is then transported within vesicles (membrane-bound
saccules), down the axons of these neurosecretory cells,
which gather to form the supraopticohypophyseal tract.
Although these axons arise from both the supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei, most arise from the supraoptic nucleus
and thus the tract is named the supraopticohypophyseal
tract. This tract descends only a short distance to terminate in
the median eminence, infundibular stalk, and posterior lobe
of the pituitary gland. These hormones are either stored in
the axon terminals or are released and then pass into the
blood circulation. Hormone release is triggered when nerve
impulses are transmitted to the axon terminals of the neurosecretory cells of the supraopticohypophyseal tract. The
axon terminals are expanded and form a direct contact with
the fenestrated capillary wall. These terminals then liberate
ADH, which passes into the fenestrated capillaries and then
flows into the general circulation. Unlike other nerve cells,
those residing in the supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei
do not establish synaptic contacts with other nerve cells.
Instead, their function is to detect alterations in the chemical
composition of the blood. When these cells are stimulated,
they liberate their hormones into the bloodstream.
The ADH released by these nerve terminals passes into
the capillary bed of the median eminence, infundibular stalk,
and posterior lobe of the pituitary to gain entrance into the
general circulation. When the water content of the body is
low, the amount of ADH released into the bloodstream is
increased. ADH acts on the kidney’s distal and collecting
tubules causing them to reabsorb water from the tubule
lumen, until the water content of the body is restored to normal, resulting in minimal water loss in the urine. When the
body’s water content is high, only small amounts of ADH are
released into the bloodstream. In response to the decreased
ADH blood levels, the kidney reabsorbs less water, resulting
a dilute urine and water loss. By altering the volume of water
lost in the urine, the kidney controls the osmotic pressure in
the blood. Thus this hormone enables the body to conserve
water and regulate body fluid content. The ADH also acts on
the smooth muscle of the vessel wall. It causes contraction of
the smooth muscle, which results in a decrease in lumen
diameter and a consequent elevation in blood pressure.
In addition, ADH is also released in response to a decrease
in blood volume as would result following hemorrhage.
Pressure receptors are located in the carotid artery and aortic
arch, while stretch receptors are located in the walls of the left
atrium and pulmonary veins. These receptors relay this sensory input to the brainstem medulla via the glossopharyngeal
and vagus nerves. From there, input is relayed via ascending
fibers to the supraoptic nucleus.
The oxytocin released by the nerve terminals, like ADH,
also passes into the capillary bed of the median eminence,
infundibular stalk, and posterior lobe of the pituitary, to gain
entrance into the general circulation. Oxytocin (G. oxy,
“rapid;” tokos, “birth;” thus “rapid labor”) has two functions.
It causes contraction of the uterine myometrium during
the final stages of pregnancy, which facilitates parturition,
and contraction of the mammary gland myoepithelial cells,
resulting in milk ejection of the active mammary gland.
Small cells located in the
arcuate nucleus and other
periventricular zone nuclei
of the hypothalamus synthesize various releasing hormones (factors) and releaseinhibiting hormones (factors) (Figs 21.9, 21.11). The releasing
hormones produced by the hypothalamus are:
• somatotropin-releasing hormone (SRH), which stimulates the release of somatotropin (growth hormone);
• prolactin-releasing hormone (PRH), which stimulates
the release of prolactin;
• corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), which stimulates the release of adrenocorticotropin;
• gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), which stimulates the release of luteinizing hormone (LH) and folliclestimulating hormone (FSH);
• thyroid-stimulating hormone-releasing hormone
(thyrotropin-releasing hormone, TRH), which stimulates
the release of TSH; and
• melanocyte-stimulating hormone-releasing hormone,
which releases melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH).
The release-inhibiting hormones produced by the
hypothalamus are:
• somatostatin, which inhibits growth hormone (GH) and
TSH release;
• prolactin-inhibitory factor (PIF, dopamine), which
inhibits the release of prolactin; and
• melanocyte-stimulating hormone inhibitory factor
(IMIF), which inhibits melanocyte-stimulating hormone
(MSH) release.
These releasing or inhibiting hormones are packaged
into vesicles that flow down the axons of these neurons,
which collectively form the tuberohypophyseal (tuberoinfundibular) tract, and are released in the median eminence
and the pituitary stalk. There they pass into a capillary plexus
that gives rise to portal veins that carry these releasing or
inhibiting hormones to the anterior pituitary gland. The
adenohypophysis contains cells that synthesize and, when
appropriately stimulated, release into the general circulation
the following trophic hormones: GH (somatotropin), prolactin, adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH, corticotropin),
FSH, LH, interstitial cell-stimulating hormone (ICSH) in
males, TSH (thyrotropin), and MSH. These hormones are
released into the bloodstream and are carried to their target
organs (endocrine glands) where they bind to receptors on
cells and stimulate (or inhibit) the release of hormones produced by the respective organs.
The pituitary gland receives its blood supply mainly from
two vessels; the superior and inferior hypophyseal arteries
(Fig. 21.12). The superior hypophyseal artery is a branch of
the internal carotid or the posterior communicating artery,
and supplies the hypophyseal stalk and the anterior lobe of
the pituitary gland. The inferior hypophyseal artery is a
branch of the internal carotid artery, and supplies the posterior lobe of the pituitary gland.
Branches of the superior hypophyseal artery drain into a
capillary plexus in the median eminence and upper part
of the infundibular stalk. This plexus in turn drains into
venules, which drain into long portal veins that descend in
the infundibular stalk to the adenohypophysis where they
branch into another capillary plexus. Both of these plexuses
consist of fenestrated capillaries. These capillaries then drain
into the nearby cavernous sinus.
The hypothalamus is a small region of the brain and a lesion confined to only a
single nucleus is uncommon. Instead, a hypothalamic lesion usually extends
into a number of nuclei, affecting their function and resulting in more than one
symptom. Hypothalamic lesions may result following skull fractures involving
the sphenoid bone, cerebrovascular accidents, or most commonly, pituitary
tumors. Depending on the nucleus or nuclei damaged, symptoms result from
the dysfunction of the autonomic nervous system, water intake, food intake,
temperature regulation, and sexual behavior.
The preoptic and anterior hypothalamic nuclei are involved in the control
of body temperature. In the event that body temperature rises above normal
limits, these nuclei initiate heat loss mechanisms in order to restore normal
body temperature. Bilateral destruction involving these nuclei results in hyperthermia, an elevation in body temperature.
The presence of infectious agents in the body results in the production of
pyrogens which may enter the bloodstream and eventually reach the hypothalamus. The pyrogens pass through the fenestrated capillaries of the anterior
hypothalamus and contact the hypothalamic receptor cells of the circumventricular organs. In response to this contact, the body’s thermostat is changed to
a higher temperature point, thus the body’s temperature becomes elevated
above normal. This is accomplished by inhibition of heat loss mechanisms,
cutaneous vasoconstriction, and shivering. Cutaneous vasoconstriction results
in the lowering of the body’s surface temperature, which is perceived as a cold
sensation, usually accompanying a fever.
The posterior hypothalamic nuclei are also involved in the control of
body temperature. In the event that body temperature drops, they initiate
mechanisms that will conserve and produce heat to restore body temperature.
Bilateral destruction involving the posterior hypothalamic nuclei results in
the inability to regulate body temperature (poikilothermia) regardless of the
environmental temperature. The reason for this phenomenon is that when the
cells of the posterior nuclei are damaged, the fibers arising from the anterior
hypothalamic nuclei are also damaged as they course through the posterior
hypothalamic nuclei on their way to their destination.
The lateral and ventromedial nuclei of the hypothalamus are involved in
eating behavior. The lateral hypothalamic nucleus contains a group of neurons
that synthesize orexins (G. orexis, “appetite”) (also referred to as hypocretins), which are hypothalamic neuropeptides that regulate food intake and
the sleep–wake cycle. Stimulation of the lateral nucleus (“feeding center”)
induces eating, whereas stimulation of the ventromedial nucleus (“satiety center”) inhibits eating. Fasting causes an increase in orexin synthesis, whereas
administration of exogenous orexin induces eating. A lesion in the lateral
nucleus results in aphagia (G., “no eating”) and a drastic drop in body weight.
A bilateral lesion in the ventromedial nucleus results in hyperphagia
(G., “overeating”) and excess body weight.
Undetectable or low levels of orexin (hypocretin) production is associated
with narcolepsy, a disorder in which an individual falls asleep suddenly, several times during the day and at inopportune times. Studies show that the
hypothalamus of an individual suffering from narcolepsy contains only onetenth of the normal number of neurons that produce hypocretin. It is believed
that narcolepsy may be caused by deficient hypocretin neurotransmission in
some individuals.
A lesion involving the cell group lateral to the lateral hypothalamic nucleus,
known as the zona incerta, results in a lack of interest in water intake. This
may result in severe dehydration and death.
The anterior and posterior hypothalamic areas are associated with the control
of the autonomic nervous system. A lesion involving the anterior hypothalamic nucleus will result in the disruption of parasympathetic activities,
whereas a lesion involving the posterior hypothalamic nucleus will result in
the disruption of both sympathetic and parasympathetic activities. The reason
for this is that although the posterior hypothalamic nucleus is involved in the
control of the sympathetic nervous system, fibers arising from the anterior
nucleus course through the posterior nucleus on their way to their destination.
Thus a lesion in the posterior nucleus will damage local hypothalamic neurons
controlling sympathetic activities and fibers passing through the nucleus controlling parasympathetic activities.
Stimulation of the lateral hypothalamus not only induces eating and drinking behaviors in animals, but also causes animals to become more active,
and even exhibit aggressive behavior or rage. Bilateral lesions in the
lateral hypothalamus cause a lack of interest in eating, drinking, and extreme
passivity of the animal. Stimulation of the ventromedial nuclei of the
hypothalamus and surrounding areas produces satiety and tranquility. Bilateral
lesions of the ventromedial areas of the hypothalamus induce excessive
eating, drinking, excitability, and aggression.
Damage to the anterior hypothalamus may result following the compression of
the paraventricular and supraoptic nuclei by a growing tumor at the ventral
aspect of the brain. The cells of this nucleus produce ADH (vasopressin), which
acts on the kidney tubules to conserve water. As a result of nuclear damage, an
inadequate amount of ADH results in diabetes insipidus. This condition is
characterized by polydipsia (excess thirst, with the drinking of large volumes of
water) and polyuria (the production of large volumes of dilute urine). Diabetes
insipidus may also result following damage of the tuberoinfundibular tract.
This is a hormonal-type diabetes insipidus, as opposed to the renal type where
the renal tubules are incapable of responding to plentiful circulating ADH.
This patient has narcolepsy.
Narcolepsy is a condition which
causes abnormal sleep patterns. It is
almost always an acquired disease and
symptoms typically begin in older
childhood or young adulthood. The most
common symptom is daytime sleepiness,
which often leads to “sleep attacks.”
Nighttime sleep is often of poor quality,
so the total sleep time during a 24-hour
period is often normal. Some of the most
characteristic and notable symptoms
arise secondary to the intrusion of REM
(rapid eye movement) states into waking
hours. REM is a stage of normal sleep in
which there is paralysis of all the muscles
except those controlling eye movements
and respiration. Dreams often occur in
REM sleep. This intrusion of REM into
waking hours accounts for episodes
of cataplexy, sleep paralysis, and
hypnagogic hallucinations.
Cataplexy refers to brief episodes of
loss of muscle tone, which is brought
about by intense emotions such as laughing or anger. This can cause falls or, in
cases where it is just partial, a head drop
or jaw drop. It can cause extreme social
embarrassment. Sleep paralysis refers
to brief episodes of complete paralysis,
which can occur just before sleep onset or
upon waking from sleep. Hypnagogic
hallucinations are hallucinations, commonly visual and sometimes frightening,
which occur before the onset of sleep
(hypnagogic) or upon waking from sleep
(hypnopompic).
Narcolepsy can be confirmed by a
multiple sleep latency test (MSLT). An
abnormally short onset of sleep (within
5 minutes) and an abnormally quick
onset of the REM stage of sleep confirm
the diagnosis of narcolepsy. A regular
sleep study should be performed to look
for other causes of excessive daytime
sleepiness, such as obstructive sleep
apnea.
The cause of narcolepsy has recently
been determined. The posterior hypothalamus contains neurons that contain
orexin (hypocretin). These neurons
project widely, including to the cerebral
cortex and brainstem. Orexin mediates
wakefulness and alertness, and it has
been demonstrated that a lack of orexin
in animals, or an alteration of the orexin
receptors, leads to symptoms reminiscent
of narcolepsy. It is thought that there is
a selective absence of these orexincontaining neurons in the posterior
hypothalamus in narcolepsy.1 The
etiology of this condition is unclear.
The sleepiness and sleep attacks
are treated with stimulants such as
amphetamines or methylphenidate.
A new medication for this, which has
less abuse potential and side effects, is
modafinil. Cataplexy can be treated
with tricyclic antidepressants or similar
medicines, which promote the effects
of amines such as norepinephrine,
dopamine, or serotonin. These
medications inhibit REM sleep.
A 68-year-old hypertensive
male had sudden onset of
headache and complete loss of sensation
of his left face, arm, and leg. This began 10
hours before admission to the emergency
room. He had no other complaint.
His blood pressure in the ER was
230/120. Other vital signs were relatively
normal. Brief examination in the ER
confirmed sensory loss on the left side
of his body, with normal strength.
Movements on the left were not well
coordinated. He was able to ambulate
quite well. An urgent head CT was
performed, which was diagnostic.
Information arising from the basal ganglia, cerebellum,
limbic system and sensory systems (with the exception of
the sense of olfaction) is relayed to the thalamus, a subcortical relay station. Here, this information is processed
and integrated and is then transmitted to specific areas of the
ipsilateral cerebral cortex. These cortical areas are in turn
connected via reciprocal feedback projections to the thalamic
subnuclei, making the cerebral cortex the most prominent
input source to the thalamus.
The thalamus not only functions in the further processing
and integration of sensory and motor information, but also
serves as the main entrance, via which this and additional
information reaches the cerebral cortex. Therefore, the thalamus not only controls the flow of numerous streams of information to the cerebral cortex for additional processing but,
ultimately, regulates cortical activity.
Although the thalamus projects mainly to the cerebral
cortex, it also provides input to the basal ganglia and the
hypothalamus.
The thalamus has an anterior and posterior pole, and four
surfaces. Its boundaries are: anteriorly, the interventricular
foramen (of Monro); posteriorly, the posterior extent of the
pulvinar; medially, the third ventricle; laterally, the posterior
limb of the internal capsule; dorsally, its free surface, which
contributes to the floor of the lateral ventricle; and ventrally,
the hypothalamic sulcus on the lateral wall of the third ventricle, separating it from the hypothalamus (Figs 22.1, 22.2).
The thalamus (G., “inner
chamber”) (Fig. 22.2) is an
oval-shaped mass of gray
matter, embedded deep
within the white matter of each cerebral hemisphere.
Although the right and left thalami are separated along most
of their medial surface by the narrow, vertically oriented
third ventricle, a short, narrow, cylindrical structure—the
interthalamic adhesion (massa intermedia), which traverses
the third ventricle—forms a bridge between them.
Although the interthalamic adhesion connects the right
and left sides of the brain, it is not considered to be a true
“commissure” since this structure consists of gray matter
only, and has no decussating fibers. The interthalamic adhesion is present in the majority of brains; however, its function
is unknown.
The stria medullaris thalami and the stria terminalis, two
thin strands of white matter, lie on the superior surface of the
thalamus (Fig. 22.3). The stria medullaris thalami courses
on the superomedial margin of the thalamus, separating its
superior from its medial surface. It is a slender bundle of twoway fibers connecting the septal nuclei and hypothalamus
with the habenular nucleus of the epithalamus. The stria
terminalis carries fibers primarily from the amygdala,
which terminate in the hypothalamus, septal area, and bed
nucleus of the stria terminalis. It courses on the superolateral
surface of the thalamus, separating its superior surface from
its lateral surface and from the body of the caudate nucleus.
The lateral aspect of the superior surface of the thalamus
contributes to the floor of the lateral ventricle and the medial
aspect of the superior surface of the thalamus displays a
groove formed by the fornix.
The thalamus rests on the mesencephalon, thus its inferior
surface forms a ceiling over the mesencephalic tectum
(Fig. 22.1). Numerous tracts such as the medial lemniscus and
the trigeminothalamic, rubrothalamic, reticulothalamic, and
dentatothalamic (cerebellothalamic) tracts, ascend through
the brainstem and pass into the thalamus from its inferior
surface. In addition, the brainstem reticular formation extends superiorly into the thalamus through this surface.
The internal medullary
lamina, a Y-shaped layer
of white matter, partitions
the thalamus into three main
groups of nuclei, the anterior,
medial, and lateral groups, based on their relative position
(Figs 22.2, 22.4). The posterior portion of this lamina, the leg
of the Y, separates the medial from the lateral thalamic nuclear
groups. Its anterior portion, which is divided into two limbs,
partially surrounds the anterior nuclear group, and separates
it from the neighboring medial and lateral nuclear groups.
The internal medullary lamina contains afferent and efferent
thalamic fibers that enter or leave the thalamic subnuclei.
The external medullary lamina is a curved layer of white
matter that follows the contour and covers mostly the anterior and lateral surfaces of the thalamus. It is composed of
myelinated thalamocortical fibers that originate in the thalamus and terminate in the cerebral cortex, and of reciprocal
feedback corticothalamic fibers that originate in the cerebral
cortex and terminate in the thalamus. The external medullary
lamina is covered by a slender layer of gray matter, the thalamic reticular nucleus, which is the most lateral (and outermost) nucleus of the thalamus (Fig. 22.4B).
The myelinated thalamocortical fibers arising from the
thalamus pass through the external medullary lamina, and
radiate from the lateral surface of the thalamus, collectively
forming the thalamic radiations. These fibers become incorporated in the various parts of the internal capsule and the
corona radiata as they ascend to terminate in the cerebral
cortex. Corticothalamic fibers also course through the corona
radiata and the internal capsule, and when they approach
the thalamus they converge to pass through the external
medullary lamina to terminate in the various thalamic
subnuclei.
Based on their afferent and
efferent connections, each
thalamic nuclear group functions as an independent unit
and serves a particular function (Figs 22.2, 22.4; Table 22.1). The nuclear groups are
further divided into subnuclei, and the role of each thalamic
subnucleus is associated with the source(s) of incoming
afferents, and the cortical target areas of its efferents
(Table 22.2).
With the exception of the thalamic reticular nucleus, all
thalamic subnuclei possess thalamic projection neurons that
relay processed information to the cerebral cortex. In addition, the thalamic subnuclei also have inhibitory gamma
aminobutyric acid (GABA)-ergic interneurons whose cell
bodies and processes are confined to a single subnucleus.
Although a number of classifications exist, this textbook
uses the most common of these and subdivides the subnuclei
into anterior, medial, and lateral nuclear groups. The anterior
and medial nuclear groups are phylogenetically the older
thalamic nuclei and are collectively referred to as the paleothalamus. The subnuclei of the lateral nuclear group are
newer, and are referred to as the neothalamus. Additionally,
because of their unique characteristics, two of the thalamic
nuclei—the intralaminar and reticular nuclei—are usually
not included in any of the three thalamic nuclear groups
listed above, but instead are grouped separately.
The anterior nuclear group consists of a composite of three
subnuclei: the anteroventral (AV), anteromedial (AM), and
anterodorsal (AD) subnuclei. The subnuclei of the anterior
group are wedged in the anterior tubercle of the thalamus,
which forms an elevation on the anterior part of the lateral
wall of the third ventricle. This is the smallest thalamic
nuclear group, and due to the comparable connections and
roles of its three subnuclei, they are collectively referred to as
the anterior nuclei of the thalamus.
The anterior nuclear group, a relay nucleus of the Papez
circuit of emotion, has a significant number of connections
with the limbic system. It receives afferent fibers relaying
information from the mammillary body of the hypothalamus
via the mammillothalamic tract, and the hippocampal formation via the fornix. It in turn projects to the cingulate gyrus of
the limbic association cortex. Due to its limbic connections,
the anterior nuclear group functions in the expression of
emotions, and due to its considerable connections with the
hippocampal formation, this group of nuclei is also believed
to be associated with learning and memory processes. The
anterior nuclei are also associated with attention.
The medial nuclear group includes the more prominent
dorsomedial nucleus (DM; also referred to as the medial
dorsal nucleus, MD), as well as the diffuse midline nuclei
(also referred to as the median or periventricular nuclei) that
are located on the most medial surface of the thalamus
(adjoining the third ventricle) and within the interthalamic
adhesion. It should be noted that some authors classify the
midline nuclei as a separate group of nuclei (and not part of
the medial group).
The DM nucleus functions in the processing of information related to emotion. It is subdivided into the parvocellular
and magnocellular divisions. The parvocellular division has
reciprocal connections with the prefrontal association cortex,
which functions in the integration of sensory information
associated with higher order cognitive function. As part of
the association loop of the basal ganglia, the globus pallidus
and the substantia nigra project to the ventral anterior and
the DM nuclei of the thalamus. These nuclei in turn project
via thalamocortical fibers to the prefrontal cortex. The magnocellular division is associated with limbic system components such as the amygdala and the orbitofrontal cortex.
Additionally, the DM nucleus has extensive connections with
the olfactory system, the hypothalamus, and the intralaminar, midline, and lateral posterior subnuclei of the thalamus.
The midline nuclei function in the modulation of cortical
excitability. They include the dorsal midline nuclei, which
are associated with the striatum and the limbic cortex, and
the ventral midline nuclei, which are associated with the
hippocampus.
The lateral nuclear group is interposed between the internal
and external medullary laminae, and consists of numerous
subnuclei that collectively form the largest nuclear group
of the thalamus. The subnuclei of this nuclear group are
arranged into two step-like rows, the dorsal and ventral tiers
of nuclei (subnuclei).
The dorsal tier of the thalamic nuclei is composed of the
lateral dorsal nucleus, lateral posterior nucleus, and the pulvinar nucleus. With the exception of the lateral dorsal nucleus,
these nuclei are connected with the association areas of the
cerebral cortex, and function in the integration of sensory input.
The lateral dorsal (LD) nucleus is the caudal continuation
of the anterior thalamic nuclear group and may play a role
in the expression of emotions. Like the anterior thalamic
nuclear group, it receives inputs from the mammillary body
via the mammillothalamic tract, and in turn projects to the
cingulate and parahippocampal gyri of the limbic system.
The lateral posterior (LP) nucleus is the rostral continuation of the pulvinar nucleus and is believed to play a role
in sensory integration. Since these nuclei have comparable
connections, they are also called the pulvinar–LP complex.
The LP nucleus is interconnected with the superior parietal
lobule (Brodmann’s areas 5 and 7) and the precuneus. It also
receives afferent terminals from components of the visual
system: the superior colliculus, the pretectal area, and the
occipital lobe.
The pulvinar nucleus (L., “cushion”) is the most prominent nucleus of the thalamus and functions in the integration of visual, auditory, and somatosensory information. It
has reciprocal projections with the association areas of the
parietal, temporal, and occipital lobes. It also receives sensory
information from components of the visual system, the
medial geniculate nucleus, and the cerebellum.
The ventral tier of the thalamic nuclei includes the ventral
anterior (VA) nucleus, ventral lateral (VL) nucleus, and
ventral posterior (VP) nucleus (also referred to as the
ventrobasal complex). The latter is further subdivided into
the ventral posterior medial (VPM) nucleus, the ventral
posterior lateral (VPL) nucleus, and the ventral posterior
inferior (VPI) nucleus. The ventral tier also includes the
metathalamic nuclei, including the medial and lateral geniculate nuclei (MGN and LGN, respectively) or bodies.
The nuclei residing in the anterior aspect of the ventral
tier of nuclei (VA and VL), serve as relay stations for the
somatic motor system including the basal ganglia and the
cerebellum. They also process inputs from the brainstem
reticular formation.
The nuclei residing in the posterior aspect of the ventral tier
of nuclei (VPM, VPL, VPI, MGN, and LGN) serve as relay
stations for all of the sensory systems (the somatosensory,
visual, auditory, and gustatory systems, but excluding the
olfactory system).
The ventral anterior (VA) nucleus consists of magnocellular
and parvocellular components. The magnocellular component is the site of termination of the nigrothalamic pathway,
which conveys information from the ipsilateral pars reticulata of the substantia nigra. The parvocellular component is
the site of termination of the pallidothalamic pathway, which
transmits information from the medial (internal) segment of
the globus pallidus. In addition, fibers from the intralaminar
and midline nuclei of the thalamus, as well as from the brainstem reticular formation, terminate in the VA nucleus. This
nucleus sends a spray of fibers throughout the frontal lobe.
The magnocellular component of this nucleus is interconnected with the frontal eye fields (Brodmann’s area 8). The
parvocellular component of this nucleus is interconnected
with the premotor cortex and supplementary motor area
(Brodmann’s area 6). The VA nucleus plays a role in the control of movement. The information arising from the substantia nigra pars reticulata is involved in movements of the
eyes, face, and head, whereas that arising from the medial
segment of the globus pallidus is associated with movement
of the limbs.
The ventral lateral (VL) nucleus is further subdivided
anatomically into an anterior (VLa) portion and a posterior
(VLp) portion. This nucleus, like the VA nucleus, consists of
magnocellular and parvocellular components.
The VLa receives afferent fibers from the basal ganglia.
Its magnocellular component receives projections from the
substantia nigra pars reticulata, and its parvocellular component receives projections from the medial segment of the
globus pallidus. The VLa in turn sends efferents to the supplementary motor area (Brodmann’s area 6) of the cerebral cortex.
The VLp receives prominent projections arising from the
deep cerebellar nuclei (mainly from the dentate nucleus) of
the opposite side, via the dentatothalamic tract. The VLp then
relays the information to the premotor and primary motor
cortex (Brodmann’s areas 6 and 4, respectively).
It is important to note that there is no overlap in the
specific target site of termination of the afferent fibers arising
from the substantia nigra, the globus pallidus, and the cerebellum. In addition, fibers from other thalamic nuclei and
the reticular formation terminate in the VL nucleus. The VL
nucleus exerts its influence on somatic motor activity via the
basal ganglia and the cerebellum.
The ventral posterior (VP) nucleus, also known as the
ventrobasal complex, is subdivided into the VPM nucleus,
VPL nucleus, and the smaller VPI nucleus, which is interposed between the latter two nuclei. The VP nucleus relays
processed sensory information to the primary somesthetic
cortex located in the postcentral gyrus of the parietal lobe
(Brodmann’s areas 3, 1, and 2). These cortical areas send
corticothalamic fibers back to the VP nucleus.
The VPM nucleus receives the terminals of the
trigeminothalmic tracts (the ventral and dorsal trigeminal
lemnisci) relaying general somatic afferent information
(touch, pressure, pain and temperature sensation, and proprioception) from the orofacial region, and special visceral
afferent sensation (taste) from the solitary nucleus.
The VPL and VPI nuclei receive terminals of the lateral
spinothalamic tract relaying pain and temperature sensation
from the body, terminals of the medial lemniscus transmitting discriminatory (fine) touch, pressure, joint movement,
and vibratory sensation from the body, and terminals from
the anterior spinothalamic tract relaying light (crude) touch
sensation from the body.
Additionally, the VPI nucleus receives fibers from the
vestibular nuclei (vestibulothalamic fibers) and projects to
the vestibular area of the somatosensory cortex.
The metathalamic nuclei include the medial and lateral
geniculate nuclei (bodies). They are two oval-shaped elevations located inferior to the pulvinar of the right and left
sides.
The medial geniculate nucleus or body (MGN or MGB) is
located on the posterior aspect of the thalamus, inferior to the
pulvinar, and lateral to the superior colliculus. This nucleus
receives afferent fibers relaying auditory input (from both
ears) from the inferior colliculus, as well as some projections
from other nuclei of the auditory system via the brachium of
the inferior colliculus, and directly via the lateral lemniscus
(the principal pathway of the auditory system). The MGN
gives rise to the auditory radiation that terminates in the
primary auditory cortex residing in the superior transverse
temporal gyrus of Heschl (Brodmann’s areas 41 and 42).
Brodmann’s areas 41 and 42 are reciprocally connected with
the MGN.
The lateral geniculate nucleus or body (LGN or LGB), a
thalamic relay nucleus for vision, is larger than its medial
counterpart. The majority of fibers of the optic tract, bringing
information from both eyes, terminate here. This nucleus
projects via the geniculocalcarine tract (optic radiation) to the
primary visual cortex (Brodmann’s area 17) on the banks of
the calcarine fissure of the occipital lobe. The LGN is reciprocally connected with the primary visual cortex; additionally,
it is interconnected with the pulvinar and other subnuclei of
the thalamus. The thalamocortical projections may play a role
in arousal of the organism, the control of visual attention, and
the regulation of visual input transmission to the primary
visual cortex.
The intralaminar nuclei mark the rostral continuation of
the ascending reticular activating system (ARAS) into the
thalamus. They consist of multiple, diffuse aggregations of
nerve cell bodies embedded within the internal medullary
lamina and the interthalamic adhesion of the thalamus. These
nuclei receive sensory information from the spinothalamic
tract, the ventral trigeminothalamic tract (ventral trigeminal
lemniscus), and the multisynaptic ascending pathways of the
reticular formation that relay pain sensation, pain perception,
and arousal of the organism. Two of these intralaminar
nuclei, the centromedian nucleus and parafascicular nucleus
are readily perceptible in the posterior part of the internal
medullary lamina. The centromedian nucleus is the most
prominent, and is located medial to the VPM and VPL nuclei.
The parafascicular nucleus is located medial to the centromedian nucleus.
The prominent centromedian nucleus is the site of termination of the fibers arising from the globus pallidus and
the premotor (part of Brodmann’s area 6) and primary motor
cortical areas (Brodmann’s area 4), whereas the parafascicular
nucleus is the site of termination of fibers arising from
the supplementary motor area (part of Brodmann’s area 6).
Both of these nuclei send prominent projections to the basal
ganglia (caudate nucleus and putamen). Their projections
to the somatosensory areas of the cerebral cortex suggest
that they function in sensorimotor integration. Furthermore,
as a result of their widespread cortical connections they are
believed to play a role in the control of cortical activity.
The intralaminar nuclei are not interconnected with other
thalamic nuclei; they only project to each other.
The thalamic reticular nucleus was named for its reticular
(mesh-like) appearance, and is not considered part of the
brainstem reticular formation. It consists of a thin layer of
nerve cell bodies that covers the external medullary lamina
on the lateral surface of the thalamus. This is the lateral-most
nucleus of the thalamus that is in direct contact with the
posterior limb of the internal capsule, laterally.
Almost all of the thalamocortical fibers destined for the
cerebral cortex give rise to collaterals that end in the thalamic
reticular nucleus. In addition, almost all of the corticothalamic fibers, on their way to the thalamic subnuclei, course
through the thalamic reticular nucleus where they send collaterals to synapse there. The thalamostriatal and reciprocal
pallidothalamic fibers also give rise to collaterals that
synapse in the thalamic reticular nucleus.
Unlike the other thalamic nuclei, which project to the cerebral cortex, the thalamic reticular nucleus has no known
direct cortical connections. Instead, it relays sensory input
locally within the reticular nucleus, to the other thalamic
nuclei, and to the reticular formation.
The thalamic reticular nucleus resides in a location where
it not only receives a copy of, but can also monitor, thalamic
communication with the cortex and the basal ganglia. This
nucleus may play a role in the control of thalamic function.
In addition to the anatomical
classification of the thalamic
nuclei that was discussed
in the previous sections,
these nuclei are also categorized according to their function. Functional organization
of the thalamic subnuclei is based on projections between
the thalamic nuclei and the cerebral cortex (see Table 22.2).
The thalamic nuclei have been classified into specific relay
(sensory relay and motor relay) nuclei, association (multimodal) nuclei, and nonspecific nuclear functional groups.
The specific relay nuclei have reciprocal feedback connections with particular, well-defined, sensory or motor areas of
the cerebral cortex (Fig. 22.5). All of the specific relay nuclei
rest in the ventral tier of the lateral nuclear group.
The sensory relay nuclei of the thalamus include the
VPM and VPL nuclei, the MGN, and the LGN. The VPM and
VPL nuclei function in the processing and integration of
somatosensory information arising from the orofacial region
and body, respectively. The MGN and LGN function in the
processing of special sensory information related to hearing
and vision, respectively.
The motor relay nuclei of the thalamus include the VA
and VL nuclei. These nuclei relay motor information arising
from the somatic motor system—including the basal ganglia
and the cerebellum—to the motor cortical areas.
In addition to the nuclei mentioned above, the anterior
nuclear group, the smallest collection of thalamic nuclei, is
also included in the specific relay nuclei group. Via its connections to the limbic system, the anterior nuclear group
plays a role in the processing of emotions, learning, and
memory processes.
The association (multimodal) nuclei, unlike the specific
relay nuclei, receive sensory and motor information from
the sensory and motor systems indirectly via a relay in
other thalamic nuclei, and from many different parts of the
brain.
The thalamic association (multimodal) nuclei include the
DM, LD, LP, and pulvinar nuclei. These nuclei are referred to
as association nuclei because they have widespread connections with the cortical association areas of the frontal, parietal, and temporal lobes. These nuclei are also referred to as
multimodal nuclei because they process various modalities.
They are involved in the processing of information related
to memory and emotional expression, and also consolidate
various types of sensory information.
The nonspecific nuclei of the thalamus include the
intralaminar nucleus and reticular thalamic nucleus. These
nuclei receive terminals arising from the caudate nucleus,
putamen, cerebellum, and motor cortex. They are involved in
the control of arousal and consciousness. Some authors also
include the midline nuclei in this functional group. The
midline nuclei are associated with the striatum and limbic
structures, and are believed to function in the modulation of
cortical excitability.
A tumor or stroke that results in thalamic damage and affects the VPM or VPL
nuclei, may at first result in diminished or complete loss of touch, pressure,
pain or temperature sensation, or proprioception from the contralateral orofacial region or body, respectively. Recall that the VPM nucleus of the thalamus
receives projections from the main sensory nucleus of the trigeminal (relaying discriminatory touch and pressure sensation) via the dorsal trigeminal lemniscus, and the spinal nucleus of the trigeminal (relaying nondiscriminatory
touch and nociceptive and temperature sensation) via the ventral trigeminal
lemniscus from the orofacial region. The VPL nucleus receives projections from
the dorsal horn of the spinal cord relaying nondiscriminatory touch, pressure,
and nociceptive and temperature sensation from the contralateral side of the
body via the anterolateral system.
Subsequent to the loss of sensation caused by a thalamic lesion, the
individual experiences paresthesias (abnormal sensations such as tingling,
pinching, or burning, in the absence of an actual stimulus), which may progress
to agonizing pain in the parts of the body where loss of sensation has occurred.
This condition is referred to as the thalamic pain syndrome (Déjérine–
Roussy syndrome). In many cases, even nonpainful, innocuous stimuli such
as a light touch or the contact of clothing on the skin, may trigger a painful sensation. This hypersensitivity is referred to as allodynia (a painful sensation
elicited from an innocuous stimulus on normal skin), hyperpathia (an unusual
and intense response to nociceptive stimuli), or dysesthesia (an abnormal
sensation triggered by the sense of touch). The pain may originate in the
thalamus but the individual perceives the pain sensation as if it arises in the
part(s) of the body where loss of sensation has occurred.
A lesion damaging the ascending sensory pathways to the thalamus
(deafferentation), or the absence of sensory input to the thalamus from a
certain part of the body (as occurs following amputation of a limb), may result
in neural plasticity within the thalamus. Alterations in neural tissue may produce changes in neural circuitry within the thalamus, causing excruciating
chronic pain.
A sensory deficit with sudden
onset and focal symptoms may be
caused by ischemic stroke or hemorrhage
of a cerebral vessel affecting one or more
of the sensory pathways on the right
side of the brain. Headache is a nonspecific symptom and may be seen in
either ischemic stroke (nonhemorrhagic)
or in cerebral hemorrhage, though it
may favor the latter. Even a very small
hemorrhage is easily detectible on head
CT and it becomes evident immediately.
The CT in this case showed a moderately
sized right thalamic hemorrhage. If this
were a nonhemorrhagic stroke the CT
would have been normal or may have
revealed only very subtle changes. With
time the stroke would have become
apparent on CT (within 48 hours).
The main priority in the treatment of
this patient is to stabilize his vital signs.
The location of this hemorrhage and the
high blood pressure indicate that the
probable cause of the hemorrhage was
hypertension. However, the patient’s
blood pressure should not be abruptly
lowered to “normal” levels. Intracerebral
pressure increases following an ischemic
stroke or hemorrhage and it is essential
that brain perfusion is maintained. This is
accomplished by a modest reduction of
the patient’s blood pressure.
A lesion affecting the thalamus is
usually easily diagnosed since it causes
a pure or relatively pure contralateral
sensory loss or alteration of sensation.
Ischemic strokes and hemorrhages are the
most common causes of thalamic lesions.
Sometimes a thalamic lesion can cause
severe, excruciating pain (referred to as
thalamic pain) that is difficult to treat.
In contrast to a stroke that affects the
thalamus, a stroke that produces a lesion
involving a particular cortical area will
produce symptoms such as aphasia
(language dysfunction) if the languagedominant hemisphere (usually the left)
is affected, or contralateral neglect if the
nondominant hemisphere (usually the
right) is affected. These symptoms are
“cortical” symptoms, and usually are
indicative of a lesion (most often a stroke)
affecting a particular area of the cerebral
cortex.
Hypertension is one of the most common causes of intracerebral hemorrhages.
It usually affects the basal ganglia,
thalamus, brainstem, or cerebellum.
Other causes of intracranial hemorrhage
include anticoagulant medication,
trauma, aneurysm, or vascular malformation. Blood will resolve spontaneously
with time. Depending on the size of the
thalamic lesion, symptoms may resolve
completely, improve partially, or remain
the same over time. A very small thalamic
stroke is sometimes clinically “silent”
and is only noted incidentally and after
the fact on a CT or MRI done for some
other reason. Most hemorrhages require
a neurosurgical consultation. Large size
hemorrhages sometimes need to be
removed.
A 45-year-old woman, who
was previously in perfect health,
had two seizures in the past week. Both
occurred suddenly and each lasted less
than a minute. The first seizure started as
twitching of the right side of the face,
which progressed to twitching of her
right hand and then her right leg. She felt
some perioral numbness as well. There
was no loss of consciousness or other
symptoms, and she was aware of what
had occurred. This happened while in
bed. The second seizure, as described by
her husband, started with facial twitching
but she rapidly lost consciousness and
then had a generalized convulsion. She
bit her tongue and had blood in her
mouth. She also had urinary incontinence. She began responding a few minutes after the convulsion, but she was still
confused and somewhat agitated for
about 30 minutes after that. She had never
had a seizure before. In between these
spells she had been normal, and examination was normal.
The cerebral cortex is the most complex component of the
human brain, as a result of its complex and widespread connections. It functions in the planning and initiation of motor
activity, perception and conscious awareness of sensory
information, learning, cognition, comprehension, memory,
conceptual thinking, and awareness of emotions.
The cerebral cortex (L. cortex, “bark”) is a multilayered
sheet of nerve cell bodies and associated cell processes that
covers the paired and prominent cerebral hemispheres of the
cerebrum, forming an outer layer much like bark covers a
tree. The majority of the cerebral cortex consists of phylogenetically the most highly evolved and complex neural
tissue of the human brain.
The central nervous system (CNS) is comprised of white
and gray matter. White matter consists mostly of nerve cell
axons, whereas gray matter consists mostly of nerve cell bodies. Gray matter is arranged into nuclei or cortex. Nuclei are
aggregations of nerve cell bodies embedded deep within the
cerebrum or in the spinal cord. The cerebral cortex consists
of 50–100 billion nerve cell bodies arranged into a three to six
layered sheet that laminates the brain surface.
The cerebral cortex overlies the subcortical white matter
of the cerebral hemispheres. In other animals, the brain’s cortical surface appears smooth, whereas in humans the brain
surface is convoluted displaying prominent, alternating grooves
and elevations as a result of the folding of the cerebral
cortex, which occurs during development. The elevations are
referred to as gyri, whereas the grooves are referred to as
sulci or fissures (Fig. 23.1). Sulci are shallow, short grooves,
whereas fissures are deeper and more constant grooves, with
a consistent location on the brain surface. The cortex forming
the gyri dips down into the pit of the adjacent sulci or fissures
to line them. Certain gyri, grooves, and fissures are similar in
all normal human brains. Others, however, may vary in different brains and in the two cerebral hemispheres of the same
brain. The gyri and sulci greatly increase the total surface area
of the cerebral cortex. If the cerebral cortex of a normal
human brain were spread out (that is, if the pleats formed by
the sulci and fissures were stretched out), the cortex would
extend over 0.23 m2 (2.5 ft2
). In the course of evolution, the
cerebral cortex became increasingly folded into alternating
gyri and sulci or fissures to facilitate its accommodation in the
limited space available in the cranial vault.
The cerebral cortex covering the cerebral hemispheres is
divided into the frontal, parietal, temporal, occipital, and
limbic lobes. All of these lobes, with the exception of the
limbic lobe, are visible on the lateral aspect of the brain.
The limbic lobe is only visible on the medial surface of a midsagittally sectioned brain. In addition to the limbic lobe, the
medial surface of the other lobes can also be seen on a midsagittal section of the brain.
The cerebral cortex is classified phylogenetically into the
allocortex (heterogenetic cortex), mesocortex (juxtallocortex),
and isocortex (homogenetic cortex). The allocortex (G. allo,
“other”) consists of the most primitive archicortex (archipallium) (G. archaios, “ancient”) of the hippocampal formation
and the more recent paleocortex (paleopallium or periallocortex) (G. palaios, “old”) of the parahippocampal gyrus
(entorhinal cortex), uncus (piriform cortex), and lateral olfactory gyrus of the olfactory system. The mesocortex (juxtallocortex) is a transitional cortex between the allocortex and
isocortex, found in the cingulate gyrus and the insula. The
isocortex is the most recent cortex, also referred to as the neocortex (neopallium), making up the four lobes, the frontal,
parietal, temporal, and occipital lobes. The neocortex makes
up over 90% of the human cerebral cortex. The remainder is
allocortex and mesocortex.
The archicortex consists of three cell layers, the paleocortex from three to five cell layers, and the mesocortex from
three to six cell layers, while the neocortex has six distinct
cell layers.
The thickness of the cortex also varies from 1.5 mm in the
primary sensory areas (being thinnest in the calcarine sulcus
of the visual cortex) to 4.5 mm in the motor and association
cortical areas. In general, the cortex is usually thickest at the
peak of each gyrus and thinnest at the pit of each sulci. The
thickness reflects the different cytoarchitectonic arrangements of the various cortical areas. These include cell density,
the types of cells present, fiber density, and the arrangement
of the cells and fibers in each of the layers.
The neocortex of the frontal, parietal, temporal, and occipital lobes is anatomically divided into the primary cortical
areas and association cortical areas. The primary cortical
areas are subdivided into a primary motor area and the
primary sensory areas:
1 The primary motor area located in the precentral gyrus of
the frontal lobe (corresponding to Brodmann’s area 4)
contains about one-third of the cell bodies of the upper
motoneurons whose axons form the corticospinal tract.
2 The primary sensory areas receive sensory information
from specific thalamic nuclei, including the following
four nuclei:
• The ventral posterior medial (VPM) nucleus of the
thalamus, which relays sensory information (touch,
pressure, pain, temperature, and proprioception)
from the orofacial region to the corresponding head
region mapped in the primary somatosensory
cortex in the postcentral gyrus of the parietal lobe
(Brodmann’s areas 3, 1, and 2). It also relays input
about head movement and orientation to the primary
vestibular area, the inferior parietal lobule.
• The ventral posterior lateral (VPL) nucleus of the
thalamus, which relays sensory information (touch,
pressure, pain, temperature, and proprioception) from
various parts of the body to the corresponding body
part region mapped in the primary somatosensory
cortex.
• The lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) of the thalamus,
which relays a single modality—visual input from the
contralateral visual field to the primary visual cortex
located in the banks of the calcarine sulcus of the
occipital lobe (Brodmann’s area 17).
• The medial geniculate nucleus (MGN) of the thalamus,
which relays a single modality—auditory information from both ears to the primary auditory cortex in
the transverse temporal gyri of Heschl in the lateral
fissure of Sylvius (Brodmann’s areas 41 and 42).
Most of the cerebral cortex consists of association cortex,
which is classified into unimodal association cortex and
multimodal (heteromodal) association cortex. Unimodal
association areas are located next to, near, or around the primary sensory cortices and expand on the functions of the
respective primary areas. As an example, the primary visual
cortex (Brodmann’s area 17) projects to the visual association
cortex (Brodmann’s areas 18, 19, 20, 21, and 37), which processes only a single modality, in this case vision, and is thus
referred to as unimodal association cortex. In contrast, the
multimodal association cortical areas receive inputs from
multiple sensory modalities; they integrate the information and
formulate a composite experience via their higher order
cognitive functions. The multimodal association cortex is
associated with imagination, judgement, decision making,
and making long-term plans.
The multilayered cerebral cortex, which contains an estimated 50–100 billion neurons, is surprisingly populated by
only three kinds of neurons: pyramidal cells, fusiform cells,
and stellate (granule) cells (Fig. 23.2). Cells of the cerebral
cortex have also been classified to include other cells; however these other cells are really variations of the pyramidal,
fusiform, and stellate cells.
Pyramidal cells may be
small to giant-sized. They all
have a pyramid-shaped cell
body, with a dendrite emerging from its apex (Fig. 23.2). This apical dendrite is oriented
perpendicular to, and courses toward, the cortical surface.
Additional dendrites, basal dendrites arising from the basal
aspect of the cell body, run horizontally and parallel to the
cortical surface. A single axon emerges from the base of the
pyramidal cell body. Some pyramidal cells have a short axon
that courses away from the cortical surface and terminates
locally in other cortical layers. The majority of pyramidal cell
axons, however, are long, give rise to a recurrent collateral
branch prior to leaving the cortex, and then enter the subcortical white matter. These long axons are destined to
either serve as commissural, association, or projection fibers.
Commissural fibers form most of the corpus callosum and
cross to the opposite cerebral hemisphere to synapse in the
cerebral cortex. Association fibers project to cortical association areas in the ipsilateral hemisphere, whereas projection
fibers leave the cortex, and project to other regions of the
CNS, such as the thalamus, striatum, brainstem, or spinal
cord.
The majority of the pyramidal cells serve in the transmission of information away from the cerebral cortex. Pyramidal
cells liberate glutamate or aspartate neurotransmitters and
form excitatory synapses at their termination. Pyramidal cells
of various sizes are the most abundant cortical cells and make
up about 75% of the cells of the cerebral cortex. They are also
the main output neurons of the cerebral cortex.
Fusiform cells reside in
the deepest cortical layer,
and their dendrites project
toward the cortical surface
(Fig. 23.2). These cells, like the pyramidal cells, project via
association, commissural, or projection fibers. The projection
fibers arising from fusiform cells project mainly to the
thalamus.
Stellate cells are small cells
and are also referred to as
granule cells. Since the dendrites of these cells radiate from their cell body in all planes,
these cells have a star-shaped appearance (Fig. 23.2). A short
axon emerges from the cell body, which projects locally, in
the cerebral cortex.
There are two types of stellate cells based on their morphological and functional characteristics: one type are
referred to as aspiny cells since they do not have spines on
their dendrites. These neurons are believed to be inhibitory
interneurons since they utilize gamma aminobutyric acid
(GABA), an inhibitory neurotransmitter. The other type
located mostly in layer IV of the cerebral cortex, are referred
to as spiny cells since they have spines on their dendrites.
They are believed to be excitatory interneurons, which
release glutamate, an excitatory neurotransmitter. Spiny
and aspiny cells are located in all cortical layers with the
exception of the most superficial layer.
The horizontal cells of
Cajal, also referred to as
horizontal cells, are spindleshaped cells, located only in
the superficial layer of the cerebral cortex (Fig. 23.2). They
give rise to a dendrite and an axon, both of which remain in
the superficial layer of the cortex. The axons of these cells run
horizontally, that is, they are oriented parallel to the cortical
surface and synapse with the pyramidal cell dendrites ramifying in this layer. This type of cell, though, is seldom seen or
is completely lacking in adult brains.
The cells of Martinotti are
multipolar interneurons displaying short dendrites
(Fig. 23.2). Although they
are located throughout the
cerebral cortex, they are most populous in the deepest cortical
layer. Their axons, which give rise to several collateral
branches, course toward the surface of the cortex.
The archicortex consists of phylogenetically the most ancient
cerebral cortex. It consists of only three cell layers: a polymorphic layer, a pyramidal layer, and a molecular layer. The
archicortex is located only in the hippocampal formation.
This type of cortex is associated with the limbic system,
which is involved in memory processes and the expression of
emotions.
Phylogenetically, the paleocortex formed after the archicortex, and consists of three to five cell layers. It is found in
the primary olfactory cortex (the piriform cortex, consisting
of the lateral olfactory gyrus, anterior half of the uncus, and
periamygdaloid cortex) and the secondary olfactory cortex,
which includes the entorhinal cortex of the parahippocampal
gyrus. It mediates the sense of smell, and may also be
involved in the processing of emotions.
The mesocortex (juxtallocortex) is a transitional cortex between the allocortex
and isocortex. It consists of
three to six layers, and is found in the cingulate gyrus and the
insula.
The neocortex consists of
six cell layers. In addition to
being named, its cell layers
are numbered sequentially
with Roman numerals (I–VI)
in the order which they
appear from superficial to
deep, that is, from immediately deep to the pia mater to the
subcortical white matter (Fig. 23.3).
Although the neocortex consists of six layers, each of these
layers is not easily distinguishable in all cortical areas. In
the motor cortex, layers II–V contain a vast number of large
pyramidal cells whose axons leave the cortex, and in their
descent to lower centers course in the corona radiata, internal
capsule, cerebral peduncle, basis pontis, and pyramids of the
medulla to terminate in the brainstem and spinal cord.
Nonpyramidal (granule) cells, on the other hand, are not
as numerous in these layers of the motor cortex. Due to
this morphological characteristic, the motor cortex is referred
to as agranular cortex. Agranular cortex is typical of the
cortical motor areas that are heavily populated by pyramidal
cells.
Unlike the motor cortex, the primary sensory cortex
contains small pyramidal cells, and is heavily populated by
nonpyramidal (granule) cells. These cells give the cortex of
the primary sensory areas a granular appearance, so it is
referred to as granular cortex.
In general, the first four layers (I–IV) of the cerebral cortex
serve as input stations, receiving corticopetal fibers, whereas
the remaining layers (V and VI) are a major source of output
corticofugal projection fibers.
The molecular (plexiform)
layer is the most superficial
layer of the cerebral cortex,
underlying the pia mater
(Fig. 23.3). As its name implies, the molecular layer consists
mainly of interlacing nerve cell processes. Although some
cells are present, they are sparse. The most numerous cells in
this layer are the horizontal cells of Cajal, which are dispersed
throughout this layer. This type of cell, though, is seldom
seen or is completely lacking in adult brains.
The interlacing fibers present in this layer consist of both
dendrites and axons from various cells. The dendrites arise
from the apices of pyramidal and fusiform cells whose cell
bodies lie in other (deeper) cortical layers. The axons consist
of afferent (thalamocortical) axon terminals arising from the
nonspecific, intralaminar, and midline nuclei of the thalamus. These thalamocortical fibers also send collaterals to
layers V and VI of the cerebral cortex. In addition, other axons
arise from stellate cells and the cells of Martinotti (both of
which are interneurons). Overall, this layer contains a myriad
of synaptic contacts.
The external granular layer
(Fig. 23.3) consists mainly of
small granule (stellate) cells
that give this layer a granular, stippled appearance.
Other cells include small pyramidal cells. The dendritic
trees emerging from these cells extend superficially to the
molecular layer. Their axons course in the opposite direction
to either synapse locally in other cortical layers, or to join the
axons of the subcortical white matter, and project to other
cortical areas as association fibers.
The external pyramidal
layer (Fig. 23.3) consists
predominantly of pyramidal
cells. Those pyramidal cells
that lie more superficially are
medium sized, whereas those lying deeper within this layer,
are large-sized cells. Some granule and Martinotti cells are
also present. The apical dendrites of the pyramidal cells
extend through the external granular layer to reach the molecular layer, whereas their axons join the subcortical white
matter to project to other parts of the cerebral cortex mostly
as association or commissural fibers. The pyramidal cell
axons of this layer are the principal source of corticocortical
fibers. In addition, some pyramidal cell axons referred to as
projection fibers leave the cortex to terminate in other parts of
the CNS. Some thalamocortical fibers from the specific relay
thalamic nuclei terminate in this layer of the primary motor
cortex. These thalamocortical fibers also send collaterals to
layers V and VI.
The internal granular layer
(Fig. 23.3) consists mostly
of granule (stellate) cells,
although some pyramidal
cells are also present. The axons of the stellate cells remain
in the cerebral cortex. The axons of pyramidal cells course
through the deeper cortical layers to either synapse there, or
join the axons of the subcortical white matter. The stellate
cells receive synapses from fibers arising in the thalamic
nuclei. The stellate cells of the primary somatosensory cortex
receive thalamocortical fibers from the VPL and VPM nuclei
of the thalamus; those in the primary visual cortex receive
afferent fibers from the LGN; whereas those of the primary
auditory cortex receive afferents from the MGN. As the
myelinated thalamocortical fibers enter the internal granular
layer, they become oriented horizontally to form a layer of
white matter, the outer band (line or stripe) of Baillarger.
This layer of white matter (consisting of thalamocortical
fibers from the LGN) is very prominent grossly in the primary visual cortex, and is referred to as the stripe of Gennari.
Due to the striped appearance of the primary visual cortex, it
is also referred to as the striate cortex. The thalamocortical
fibers also send collaterals to layers V and VI. Layer IV is the
main afferent (input) station of the cerebral cortex and is
especially thicker in the primary sensory areas.
The internal pyramidal
layer (Fig. 23.3) is thickest in
the motor areas of the cerebral cortex since it is a major
source of efferent (output) fibers contributing to the corticonuclear and corticospinal tracts. This layer is the source
of the majority of corticofugal (output) fibers of the cerebral
cortex.
The internal pyramidal layer consists primarily of large
and medium-sized pyramidal cells. Stellate and Martinotti
cells are also present in this layer. The primary motor cortex
(Brodmann’s area 4) located in the precentral gyrus of the
frontal cortex contains a group of giant pyramidal cells, the
cells of Betz, which are unique to layer V of this cortical area.
This layer is the source of the majority of corticofugal (output) fibers of the cerebral cortex. The pyramidal cells of this
layer give rise to axons that form the corticotectal, corticorubral, corticoreticular, corticopontine, corticonuclear, and
corticospinal tracts. All of these tracts terminate at various
levels of the brainstem, except for the corticospinal tracts that
terminate in the spinal cord. In addition, corticostriate fibers
arising from pyramidal cells of this layer descend to terminate in the striatum (caudate nucleus and putamen) of the
basal ganglia. Layer V gives rise to fibers that function in
motor activity.
In addition to the neurons and their processes, this layer
also contains a group of horizontally oriented myelinated
fibers collectively forming a prominent stripe of white matter, the inner band (line or stripe) of Baillarger, located in
the deep aspect of this layer. This stripe of white matter consists of collateral branches arising from the axons of cortical
association neurons that are destined for layers II and III of
the cerebral cortex, as well as collateral branches arising from
the pyramidal cells residing in this layer. Layer V is thickest
in the motor areas of the cerebral cortex since it is a major
source of efferent fibers contributing to the corticonuclear
and corticospinal tracts.
In addition to the prominent horizontally oriented outer
and inner bands of Baillarger present in layers IV and V,
respectively, there are also vertically oriented, but less
prominent, groups of afferent and efferent axons that run
through the cortical layers.
The multiform (fusiform)
layer is the deepest layer
of the cerebral cortex and
lies immediately next to the
white matter underlying the
cortex (Fig. 23.3). The multiform layer consists mostly of
fusiform cells, although pyramidal cells and interneurons
are also present. The axons of the fusiform and pyramidal
cells course in the underlying white matter as association
and commissural fibers that terminate in the cerebral cortex,
or as corticothalamic projection fibers that terminate in the
thalamus.
The cerebral cortex is not only organized into six cell layers
that run parallel to the cortical surface, but it is also organized
into cell columns, which are aligned perpendicular to the
cortical surface. The cortical columns are believed to hold the
key to cortical function, and represent specific functional
units. As an example, within the somesthetic cortex, the cells
of certain specific columns are stimulated by impulses related
to touch, other columns respond to nociception, whereas
others respond to proprioceptive input.
The cerebral cortex receives the following afferent (input)
fibers: corticocortical (association and commissural) excitatory fibers (which release glutamate or aspartate) from
ipsilateral and contralateral cortical areas, thalamocortical
excitatory fibers from thalamic nuclei, cholinergic excitatory
fibers from the basal forebrain nuclei, noradrenergic
inhibitory fibers from the brainstem locus ceruleus, and serotonergic inhibitory fibers from the brainstem raphe nuclei.
The afferent fibers arising from the VPL, VPM, ventral
lateral (VL), and ventral anterior (VA) nuclei and the MGN
and LGN of the thalamus establish synaptic contacts with
the stellate cells residing in layer IV of the cerebral cortex.
Fibers arising from other thalamic nuclei and the remaining
cortical input sources establish synaptic contacts in layers
I–IV of the cerebral cortex.
The cholinergic and serotonergic afferents to the cerebral
cortex function in the control of sleep and arousal.
Cortical efferent fibers arise
from the output neurons of
the cerebral cortex: the pyramidal and fusiform cells.
Their myelinated axons course deep, pass into the subcortical
white matter, and then are distributed to widespread regions
of the CNS. Thus the subcortical white matter consists of
these three main types of fibers: association, commissural,
and projection fibers.
Association fibers consist
of axons arising from small
pyramidal cells, primarily
from cortical layers II and III.
These fibers vary in length
from short to long, and project in the ipsilateral hemisphere. Association fibers that connect various cortical areas
make up most of the subcortical white matter. These fibers
gather to form fasciculi that connect different lobes, but, like a
two-way highway, fibers merge into and exit these fasciculi
all along their course.
The short association fibers connect adjacent gyri. These
fibers leave the cortex of one gyrus, enter the underlying
white matter, and then loop around the pit of a sulcus and
project into the cortex of an adjacent gyrus. Consequently
these fibers are also referred to as U-fibers or arcuate fibers
(Fig. 23.4A). These fibers bridge the primary sensory areas
with the adjacent cortical association areas.
The long association fibers connect different lobes of the
same hemisphere. These fibers leave the cortex of one lobe,
enter the underlying white matter, gather to form a bundle,
and then project to the cortex of a different lobe of the same
hemisphere.
Bundles of long association fibers form the following
fasciculi: the superior and inferior longitudinal fasciculi,
the superior and inferior occipitofrontal fasciculi, and the
cingulum (Fig.23.4).
The superior longitudinal fasciculus interconnects the
frontal lobe with the parietal, temporal, and occipital lobes. As
these fibers link these lobes they form a dome over the insula
and radiate within the parietal, temporal, and occipital lobes.
The superior longitudinal fasciculus contains a group
of fibers, the arcuate fasciculus, that forms a distinct arch
posterior to the insula. This fasciculus links Broca’s area (the
frontal lobe motor area for speech) with Wernicke’s area (the
temporal lobe area for language comprehension).
The inferior longitudinal fasciculus (temporo-occipital
bundle) connects the temoporal and occcipital lobes.
The superior occipitofrontal fasciculus (subcallosal
bundle) interconnects the frontal lobe with the occipital lobe.
The fibers of the inferior occipitofrontal fasciculus, which
like their superior counterpart also interconnect the frontal
and occipital lobes, radiate in the frontal lobe, pass through
the temporal lobe inferior to the insula, to also radiate in the
occipital lobe. Some of its fibers curve around on the deep
aspect of the lateral sulcus, interconnecting the frontal and
temporal lobes, and as a result of their hook-like path are
referred to as the uncinate fasciculus (L. uncus, “hook”).
The cingulum is embedded in the cingulate gyrus, and
its fibers form a connection between the anterior perforated
substance and the parahippocampal gyrus.
Commissural fibers arise
in one cerebral hemisphere,
and cross the midline to terminate in the corresponding
cortical area of the contralateral hemisphere (Fig. 23.5A). These fibers provide an avenue
of communication between the corresponding cortical areas
of the two hemispheres.
Commissural fibers consist of the myelinated axons of
medium-sized pyramidal neurons residing in various layers
of the cerebral cortex.
The corpus callosum is the most massive commissure in
the entire nervous system, linking mainly corresponding areas
of the neocortex of the two cerebral hemispheres. The corpus
callosum, however, also contains commissural fibers that
arise in certain cortical areas of one cerebral hemisphere and
cross to the opposite side to terminate in noncorresponding
areas of the contralateral hemisphere. This is true for fibers
arising in the primary visual cortex of one cerebral hemisphere that cross to the opposite side to terminate in the
visual association cortex of the contralateral hemisphere.
Similarly, parts of the motor and somesthetic cortical areas
where the hand is represented, do not receive commissural
fibers from the corresponding motor and sensory cortical areas
of the contralateral hemisphere. However, the somesthetic
association areas receive commissural fibers that connect the
two cerebral hemispheres, thus each hemisphere samples
information available to the contralateral hemisphere.
The corpus callosum consists of the following component
parts: the rostrum and genu anteriorly, the body forming the
roof of the lateral ventricles, and the splenium posteriorly.
The rostrum and genu consist of commissural fibers connecting the anterior cortical areas of the frontal lobe. The body
consists of most of the commissural fibers that connect the
remaining frontal lobe, parietal lobe, and part of the temporal
lobe. Posteriorly, the splenium consists of commissural fibers
that connect the occipital lobes. Cortical commissural fibers
emerge mainly from the pyramidal cells residing in the cortical superficial layers and the external granular (layer II) and
external pyramidal (layer III) layers.
Other commissures of the brain include the anterior
(Fig. 23.5B) and posterior commissures that bridge the
temporal lobes, and the hippocampal commissure (commissure of the fornix) connecting the hippocampal formation
of the two hemispheres.
Commissural fibers form an anatomical bridge connecting
the two cerebral hemispheres, which is essential in the
integration of information in the two sides of the brain.
The afferent fibers to the
cerebral cortex are also
referred to as corticopetal
fibers. They include: (i)
thalamocortical fibers arising from the VPL and VPM
nuclei of the thalamus relaying sensory information such as
touch, pressure, conscious proprioception, two-point tactile
sensation, as well as pain and temperature sensation from the
body and head to the sensory cortex; (ii) the MGN of the
thalamus relaying auditory information via the auditory
radiation to the auditory cortex; and (iii) the LGN of the
thalamus relaying visual information via the optic radiation
to the visual cortex. Although these afferent fibers terminate in layers I–IV of the cerebral cortex, most terminate in
layer IV.
The efferent fibers from the cerebral cortex are referred to
as corticofugal fibers. These fibers consist of axons arising
from large pyramidal cells that course in the corona radiata
and internal capsule to terminate in the basal ganglia, the
brainstem, and the spinal cord. Corticofugal fibers include
fibers of the corticoreticular, corticorubral, corticonuclear,
corticopontine, corticotegmental, and corticospinal tracts.
The internal capsule is a
massive, fan-shaped collection of fibers (white matter)
that connect the thalamus to
the cerebral cortex. On horizontal section, it appears as a wide letter “L” with its apex
directed toward the midline of the cerebrum. It is divided
into an anterior limb, a genu (L., “knee”), and a posterior
limb. The two limbs converge toward the genu, the angle
between the anterior and posterior limbs. The anterior limb is
interposed between the head of the caudate nucleus and the
lenticular nucleus. The posterior limb is interposed between
the thalamus and the globus pallidus. The majority of the
internal capsule fibers traversing the cerebrum connect the
thalamus to the cerebral cortex. Descending motor fibers arising from the motor cortex destined for the brainstem and the
spinal cord also descend in the internal capsule. In addition
to the above components, the internal capsule also has a sublenticular limb whose fibers run ventral to the lenticular
nucleus and a retrolenticular limb whose fibers run caudal to
the lenticular nucleus.
The anterior limb of the internal capsule includes the anterior thalamic radiations (corticothalamic and thalamocortical
fibers) serving as a channel between the thalamus and the
cerebral cortex. Frontopontine fibers also pass through the
anterior limb of the internal capsule. The genu of the internal
capsule transmits corticonuclear (corticobulbar) fibers arising from the frontal and motor cortex and descend to terminate in the cranial nerve motor nuclei in the brainstem.
The posterior limb accommodates the corticospinal tract
in its posterior third or half and the central thalamic radiations (corticothalamic and thalamocortical fibers). The sublenticular limb carries the auditory radiations arising from
the MGN to terminate in the transverse temporal gyri of
Heschl. The retrolenticular limb carries visual information
from the LGN to the visual cortex via the geniculocalcarine
radiations (optic radiations).
As the fibers of the internal capsule emerge from between
the caudate nucleus and the lenticular nucleus, they spread
out forming a curved radiating crown, the corona radiata,
containing afferent and efferent fibers to and from the cerebral cortex.
The cerebral cortex of each
cerebral hemisphere is
divided anatomically into
five lobes: the frontal, parietal, temporal, occipital, and
limbic lobes (Fig. 23.6). All of the lobes are visible on the
lateral aspect of the brain, with the exception of the limbic
lobe, which is visible only from the medial surface of the
brain.
The frontal lobe is involved in motor control, cognitive
functions, the processing of emotions, and the motor aspects
of language. The parietal lobe functions in sensation; it
processes touch, pressure, pain and temperature sensation,
and proprioception. The temporal lobe contains the cortical
areas that process hearing, memory, emotions, and the sensory aspects of speech. The occipital lobe has the exclusive
function of processing visual information, and the limbic
lobe functions in the processing of emotions.
The frontal lobe extends from the rostral pole of the cerebral
hemisphere, caudally to the central sulcus (of Rolando) and
inferiorly to the lateral fissure (of Sylvius) (see Fig. 23.5).
The parietal lobe extends from the central sulcus
anteriorly, to the parieto-occipital sulcus posteriorly, and
the lateral fissure inferiorly.
The temporal lobe extends from the lateral fissure
superiorly, to its free inferior border, and posteriorly to an
imaginary line extending from the posterior extent of the
lateral fissure inferior–posteriorly, separating it from the
occipital lobe.
The occipital lobe extends from the parieto-occipital sulcus to the preoccipital notch, which accommodates the lateral
pole of the cerebellar hemisphere. It consists of the cortex
covering the caudal pole of the cerebral hemisphere.
The limbic lobe is not visible laterally. Unlike the other
lobes, which consist of only neocortex, it is composed of
archicortex, mesocortex, and some neocortex.
The cerebral cortex consists
of certain cell types arranged
into three to six layers, as
described above. The thickness of these layers, and the number and type of cells within
each layer, however, varies in different regions of the cortex.
The cerebral cortex was originally classified by Brodmann
into 52 different cytoarchitectural areas, but he did not assign
a function to each area at that time. He numbered them 1 to
52, which reflected the order in which he examined and
mapped them (Fig. 23.7). Additional studies have provided
information correlating a function to many of these areas,
referred to as Brodmann’s areas. The anatomical/functional
correlation, however, is not as accurate as was thought in
the past. Some of these areas are so commonly referred to
that both name, and number, should be known by the
student. These areas are: the primary somatosensory cortex
(Brodmann’s areas 3, 1, and 2), motor cortex (Brodmann’s
areas 4, 6, and 8), secondary sensory cortex (Brodmann’s
areas 5 and 7), visual cortex (Brodmann’s areas 17, 18, and
19), and auditory cortex (Brodmann’s areas 41 and 42).
The functional areas of the cerebral cortex are shown in
(Fig. 23.8).
he motor activity of the
entire opposite side of
the body is controlled by the
motor areas of the cerebral
cortex that are located anterior to the central sulcus. Fibers arise from the primary
motor cortex (M-I), the secondary motor cortex (M-II), and
the primary somatosensory (somesthetic) cortex (S-I) of the
frontal and parietal lobes to terminate in the motor nuclei of
the brainstem and spinal cord.
The primary motor cortex resides in the precentral gyrus of
the frontal lobe, and corresponds to Brodmann’s area 4. It
plays an important role in the execution of distinct, well
defined, voluntary movement (Fig. 23.8). The precentral gyrus
of the right cerebral hemisphere controls movement of the
left side of the head and body, whereas that of the left cerebral
hemisphere controls the right side of the head and body. The
body is mapped on the primary motor cortex somatotopically
as an upside down homonculus (L., “little person”) (Fig.
23.9). The part of the precentral gyrus controlling movement
of the toes is located near its superior aspect, whereas the part
of the precentral gyrus controlling movement of the tongue,
mouth, and larynx is located near its inferior aspect (bordering the lateral fissure). A noticeable characteristic of the
primary motor cortex in humans is that more than half of it is
associated with the motor activity of the hands, tongue, lips,
and larynx—reflecting the manual dexterity and ability for
speech that humans possess. It also contributes to the motor
control of the limb musculature, specifically to the control of
the distal muscles of the extremities (i.e., the muscles controlling movements of the hands and feet). Nerve cells in the
primary motor cortex are organized into groups, each group
sending its axons to the cranial nerve motor nuclei, or the
reticular formation, or the spinal cord gray matter, where
they control the motor activity of a single muscle. The total
cortical area that mediates motor activity of a particular body
region is proportional to the complexity of the movements
produced in that region.
Prior to the onset of movement, the primary motor cortex
receives instructions and information about the pattern of the
intended movement from the other motor areas of the cortex.
The secondary motor cortex consists of four regions: the
supplementary motor area, the premotor cortex, the frontal
eye field, and the posterior parietal motor area. The first three
of these motor cortical areas reside in the frontal lobe (rostral
to the central sulcus); the posterior parietal motor area is
located in the parietal lobe. The principal function of the secondary motor cortex is the programing of complex motor
activity, which is then relayed to the primary motor cortex
where the execution of motor activity is initiated. The primary motor cortex then translates this information into the
execution of movement, and relays it mainly to the brainstem
or spinal cord. Most of the nerve signals that arise in the secondary motor cortex mediate complex movements produced
by groups of muscles performing a particular task, unlike the
discrete muscle contractions elicited by stimulation of the
primary motor cortex.
The supplementary motor area (SMA) corresponds to
the medial and superolateral aspect of Brodmann’s area 6.
This area receives axon terminals from the basal ganglia (the
globus pallidus and the pars reticulata of the substantia
nigra) via a relay in the ventral lateral (VLa) nucleus of the
thalamus. Input from the basal ganglia assists the SMA
in its role in the programing phase of the patterns and
sequences of complex movements, and the coordination of
bilateral movements. The SMA mediates muscle contractions
of the axial (trunk) and proximal limb (girdle) musculature
(i.e., the muscles controlling movements of the arm and
thigh).
The premotor cortex (PMC) corresponds to most of
Brodmann’s area 6 on the lateral aspect of the frontal lobe.
The PMC receives axon terminals from the cerebellum via
a relay in the ventral lateral (VLp) nucleus of the thalamus,
and fibers from the cortical association areas. Input from
the cerebellum assists the PMC in its role in movement. The
main function of this area is the motor control of axial and
proximal limb musculature. It also plays a role in orienting
the body and upper limbs in the direction of a target. Once a
motor task has been initiated, activity in the PMC diminishes,
reflecting its key function in the planning phase of motor
activity.
The frontal eye field (FEF) corresponds to Brodmann’s
area 8. This cortical area is located rostral to the premotor
area, on the lateral aspect of the frontal lobe. This area contains nerve cell bodies whose axons join the corticonuclear
tract and descend to terminate in the eye movement control
centers located in the midbrain reticular formation and the
paramedian pontine reticular formation. They in turn transmit information to the motor nuclei of cranial nerves III, IV,
and VI, which control voluntary eye movements. The FEF
plays a role in the coordination of eye movements, particularly those mediating voluntary visual tracking of a moving
object via conjugate deviation of the eyes.
The posterior parietal motor area (PMA) corresponds to
Brodmann’s areas 5 and 7. Area 5 is associated with tactile
discrimination and stereognosis, as well as statognosis in
relation to reaching and guiding movements (Fig. 23.8).
Area 7 (the posterior parietal visual area) is involved with
movements that require visual guidance.
The primary sensory areas are involved in distinguishing
and integrating sensory input relayed there primarily by the
thalamic nuclei.
The primary somatosensory cortex is located in the postcentral gyrus on the lateral surface of the parietal lobe, and
corresponds to Brodmann’s areas 3, 1, and 2 (see Fig. 23.1A).
The primary somatosensory cortex also comprises the dorsal
part of the paracentral lobule, which resides and is visible
only on the medial surface of the cerebral hemisphere. This
cortical region is the site of termination of the thalamocortical
fibers arising from the VPL and VPM nuclei of the thalamus.
These fibers relay sensory information from the contralateral
half of the body and head, respectively. The body is represented on the somatosensory cortex by an upside-down
homunculus (Fig. 23.9). The foot is represented on the
superior medial surface of the hemisphere, the leg, thigh, trunk,
shoulder, arm, and forearm on the superior surface of the postcentral gyrus, whereas the hand, head, teeth, tongue, larynx,
and pharynx are on the lateral surface of the postcentral
gyrus. The total cortical area representing a body part is
proportional to the discriminative capability of the body part.
The primary sensory cortex also includes Brodmann’s
area 3a, which is buried in the central sulcus. This area
receives sensory input from muscle receptors.
Some of the cells residing in the primary somatosensory
cortex give rise to fibers that descend to terminate in the
brainstem and spinal cord gray matter. There they influence
motor activity, not by synapsing with motoneurons, but
instead by modulating the transmission of sensory input from
peripheral structures into the brainstem and spinal cord.
The neurons residing in the visual cortex respond to different
visual stimuli relayed by neurons conveying color, motion,
three-dimensional vision, or a combination of various visual
stimuli.
The primary visual cortex is located mainly in the medial
surface of the occipital lobes on the banks of the calcarine
fissure, although it extends into their posterolateral surface.
The primary visual cortex is the thinnest cortex of the entire
brain. Layer IV of this cortex is prominent due to a thick layer
of myelinated fibers, the external band of Baillarger. This
band is characteristically so thick in this cortex that it gives the
primary visual cortex a grossly visible striped appearance,
and is referred to as the stripe of Gennari. The primary visual
cortex thus is also referred to as the striate cortex.
The LGN projects visual information to the primary visual
cortex (V-I) (Brodmann’s area 17). This cortical area receives
visual input arising from the contralateral visual field: the
temporal half of the ipsilateral retina and the nasal half of the
contralateral retina.
The primary visual cortex receives fibers of the geniculocalcarine tract (optic radiation) arising from the LGN of the
thalamus. Table 23.1 lists the topographic relationships of
fibers from the retina to the LGN, and then to the banks of the
calcarine sulcus.
The primary visual cortex receives visual input from
the macula of the retina in its caudal third, and from the
paramacular (and more peripheral) fields of the retina in its
rostral portions. The macular representation in the primary
visual cortex is much larger than that of other areas of the
retina, reflecting the high visual acuity of the macula.
The primary visual cortex is arranged into columns oriented perpendicular to the cortical surface, extending from
the cortical surface (under the pia mater) to the subcortical
white matter. Nerve cells in a particular cortical column are
functionally similar. Columns in the primary visual cortex
include the ocular dominance columns, the site where fibers
relaying information from the ipsilateral or the contralateral
eye terminate, and the orientation columns, where nerve
cells are responsive to visual stimuli that have a comparable
spatial orientation. Layers II and III of the primary visual
cortex also contain vertically oriented aggregates of nerve
cells that are responsive to color.
The primary auditory cortex (Brodmann’s areas 41 and 42)
resides deep in the lateral fissure (of Sylvius), in the hidden
superior surface of the superior temporal gyrus, containing
the transverse temporal gyri of Heschl, and in the floor of
the lateral fissure. The primary auditory cortex of each side
receives information from both ears by way of the medial
geniculate body of the thalamus, and then sends projections to the contralateral side via the corpus callosum. The
primary auditory cortex plays an important function in the
detection of pattern alteration as well as in the location of
the sound.
The primary auditory cortex receives the auditory radiations from the lateral geniculate nucleus. This cortical region
has a tonotopic representation of frequencies, that is, neurons
responding to low frequencies reside in its rostral extent,
whereas neurons responding to high frequencies reside in its
caudal extent. The primary auditory cortex is arranged into
two-dimensional, alternating, vertically oriented columns of
neurons. One dimension of the auditory cortex is composed
of frequency columns. The cells in each frequency column
respond to an auditory stimulus of a particular frequency. As
mentioned above, cells responding to low frequencies reside
in the frequency columns located in the rostral extent of
the transverse temporal gyri of Heschl, whereas frequency
columns containing cells responding to gradually higher
frequencies are lined up in sequence toward the caudal extent
of the primary auditory cortex.
The other dimension of the auditory cortex is composed
of alternating binaural columns. There are two types of
binaural columns: summation columns and suppression columns. The neurons residing in the summation columns
respond to an auditory stimulus that stimulates both ears
simultaneously. In contrast, the neurons in the suppression
columns respond maximally to an auditory stimulus that
stimulates only one ear, but respond minimally when the
auditory stimulus stimulates both ears (Fig. 23.10).
The cortical area that receives vestibular information is
ambiguous. However, it is believed that the vestibular nuclei
project primarily crossed fibers to the contralateral VPM
nucleus of the thalamus, which in turn relays this input to
the inferior parietal lobule, the primary vestibular area, and
the superior temporal gyrus next to the primary auditory
cortex. This area receives input related to head movement
and position.
Taste receptors relay gustatory information to the solitary
nucleus in the brainstem. The solitary nucleus then transmits
the information via the ipsilateral central tegmental tract to
the VPM nucleus of the thalamus. The thalamus then projects
this input to the inferior extent of the postcentral gyrus
(Brodmann’s area 43). The cortical area where taste information is relayed resides next to the area where the general sensory input from the tongue is transmitted.
The primary olfactory area is located in the prepiriform
and periamygdaloid regions of the cerebral cortex. These
regions, however, unlike other cortical areas, have not been
assigned a Brodmann’s area number
Sensory association areas
are also referred to as
secondary sensory areas,
and usually surround the
primary sensory areas. They
receive input from the primary sensory areas and further
process, integrate, and interpret the incoming sensory input.
The cerebral cortex of the human brain is classified into
sensory, motor and association cortex. The human brain
contains more association cortex than the brain of any other
animal, and thus is the principal component of the human
cerebral cortex.
The sophisticated functions of the human association cortex is what distinguishes us from other animals. Our ability to
learn, reason, and plan our daily activities and lives, and our
language skills, are some examples of association cortical
functions.
A somesthetic association area is located in the cortex of
the superior parietal lobule (Brodmann’s areas 5, 7, and 40).
This cortex receives input mainly from the primary somesthetic cortex; however fibers arising from the VPL and VPM
nuclei of the thalamus also terminate here. This cortex functions primarily in the integration of sensory input from various sensory systems. One way of testing the function of the
somesthetic association cortex of a patient is by placing an
object (e.g., a spoon) in his hand, and while his eyes are closed
ask him to identify the object by using his other senses (e.g.,
touch). In order to identify the object, an individual needs
to feel the size, shape, texture, and weight of the object, but
in addition, to recognize it by associating it with previous
sensory experiences linked to it. This should enable the individual to recognize and identify the object without looking.
The primary visual cortex projects to the surrounding visual
association cortex (extrastriate cortex; Brodmann’s areas
18 and 19), which consists of the secondary and tertiary visual
cortical areas. The primary visual cortex projects to the visual
association areas where information is processed and subsequently relayed to the tertiary visual areas (V-3, V-4, and
the middle temporal area) of the cortex. The secondary visual
areas function in identifying an object, determining its location
and color, comparing it to prior visual experiences, and determining its significance. Furthermore, the middle temporal
area has an important function in detecting moving objects.
The secondary auditory cortical areas, although numerous,
are not well defined, and include Brodmann’s area 22 and
part of area 42. They surround the primary auditory cortex
and form reciprocal connections with the primary auditory
cortex. The secondary auditory cortical areas function in
the interpretation of sounds and, via their connections with
Wernicke’s area, function in the comprehension of language.
There are two cortical areas that function in the processing of
language: Wernicke’s area and Broca’s area. The left cerebral
hemisphere is the dominant hemisphere in language functions in the majority of individuals.
Wernicke’s area (see Fig. 23.8) consists of auditory association cortex (part of Brodmann’s area 22), as well as parts
of the supramarginal and angular gyri (Brodmann’s areas
37, 39, and 40, usually in the left, dominant hemisphere).
Wernicke’s area is also referred to as the receptive (sensory)
language area, general interpretative area, or the gnostic area.
It plays an important role in the comprehension and formulation of language. In the right cerebral hemisphere this cortical
area is an auditory association area that serves to determine
the emotional undertones of language. When we hear someone speak, the person’s voice often reveals if he/she is happy,
upset, angry, etc.
Broca’s area (see Fig. 23.8), the motor speech area
(Brodmann’s areas 44 and 45), is located in the opercular and
triangular portions of the inferior frontal gyrus. This area not
only functions in the initiation of a sequence of complex
movements (via its connections with the primary motor cortex), which are essential in the production of speech (a motor
function), but also has expressive language capacities (e.g.,
grammar). The supplementary motor area is also necessary
in the production of language.
Wernicke’s and Broca’s areas of speech are interconnected
via the arcuate fasciculus (Fig. 23.11), which is necessary for
language and the ability to communicate.
The following is a general description of how a word that
is heard is repeated (Fig. 23.12A). Auditory sensory input (a
word) reaching the ear is relayed via the auditory pathway
to the primary auditory cortex where it is “heard.” The
primary auditory cortex transmits the input to the auditory
association cortex, which functions in the interpretation of
sound. This sound is comprehended in Wernicke’s area,
which projects the information by way of cortical association
fibers (the arcuate fasciculus) to Broca’s area. Broca’s area is
involved in the planning of the motor activity that is necessary for the word to be produced. Broca’s area projects this
information to the premotor cortex where motor activity is
planned and relayed to the primary motor cortex, which
initiates the movements necessary to produce speech. When
an individual reads and says the words (Fig. 23.12B), the
visual pathway relays the sensory visual input to the primary
visual cortex where the words are “seen.” The primary visual
cortex transmits this input to the association visual cortex
where the significance of the words is determined. The visual
information is then relayed to Wernicke’s area where the
words are comprehended, and the creation of the words
takes place. Wernicke’s area then projects to Broca’s area,
which, as described above, dictates the motor activity necessary to produce the words.
The prefrontal cortex is located in the frontal lobe, anterior
to the motor cortex, and consists of multimodal association
cortex. It has extensive reciprocal connections with the dorsomedial, ventral anterior, and intralaminar thalamic nuclei
via corticothalamic and thalamocortical projection fibers. In
addition, its orbital region is associated with the limbic system, whereas its dorsolateral region is interconnected with
the association areas of the parietal, temporal, and occipital
lobes via long association bundles. Furthermore, both of
these cortical regions are a source of fibers that terminate
in the caudate nucleus and putamen of the basal ganglia.
Commissural fibers arising from the prefrontal cortex pass
via the corpus callosum to the opposite hemisphere to terminate not only in the cortex of the prefrontal area, but also in
that of the other lobes.
The dorsolateral region of the prefrontal cortex functions
in working memory. Observing a laboratory demonstration at
school and then being able to repeat the task soon afterwards,
is an example of working memory. Individuals with lesions
o the dorsolateral region have difficulty in problem solving
and in paying attention. The main function of the orbital
region is the expression of an appropriate behavioral response in a particular situation. Individuals with lesions in
the orbital region are impulsive and exhibit an inappropriate
behavioral response for a given circumstance.
The prefrontal cortex may play a role in the individual’s
level of intelligence, education, as well as psychological state.
It is believed that the prefrontal cortex may correspond to the
neocortical area of the limbic system.
In the human brain, the left cerebral hemisphere is usually
the dominant hemisphere (in about 95% of the population),
whereas the right hemisphere is the nondominant hemisphere (Fig. 23.13). The dominant hemisphere mediates
processes related to language, speech, problem solving, and
mathematical skills. The nondominant hemisphere mediates
spatial perception, recognition of faces, as well as music and
poetry skills.
Over the years, clinical information has been derived from studying patients
treated for various cortical lesions resulting from trauma, cerebral vascular
accident (stroke), or tumors. In addition, cortical function has also been studied
by observations made on conscious patients (under local anesthesia) while
undergoing brain surgery. Interestingly, although the brain processes pain
sensation arising from other injured body tissues, the brain itself has no pain
sensation; thus recordings and observations can be made during brain surgery
while the patient is awake. The cerebral cortex is an extraordinary structure
since, following a cerebral lesion, some cortical functional reorganization can
result to some degree in restored cortical function.
Historically, surgical sectioning of the corpus callosum has been performed
to alleviate symptoms of epilepsy. This surgical procedure has proved to be
effective in preventing seizures from being transferred from one cerebral
hemisphere to the other. Although individuals seem normal following this
surgery, postoperative studies have revealed some interesting findings. When
patients were asked to read words that were presented in their right visual
field, they were able to see and to read the words. However, when words were
presented in their left visual field, they could not read them as they were not
even aware that the words were there. One explanation is as follows: visual
information from the right visual field is relayed to the left cerebral hemisphere
(via the visual pathway, which was not affected when the corpus callosum was
sectioned), which is the dominant hemisphere in the processing of language in
most individuals. Thus the patients were able to see and read the words. In
contrast, visual input from the left visual field is relayed to the right cerebral
hemisphere (again, via the visual pathway, which was not affected when the
corpus callosum was sectioned), the nondominant hemisphere for language.
As a result of the bisection of the corpus callosum the visual input relayed to
the right cerebral hemisphere has no way of also reaching the left hemisphere
containing the language areas. Consequently, patients could not see or read
the words, as if they had a left homonymous hemianopia. These individuals are
not blind. When they were asked to select with their hand an object that corresponds to the object that was presented in their left visual field, they selected
the matching object. This showed that the visual system is functioning properly, and that it is the language function that is not. Although the above studies
support the finding that the left cerebral hemisphere is the “dominant” hemisphere in the processing of language, other studies indicate that the right
hemisphere may also be involved to some extent in language comprehension.
The corpus callosum receives its blood supply from the anterior and posterior
cerebral arteries. Its genu and body are supplied by the anterior cerebral
artery and the splenium is supplied by both the anterior and posterior cerebral
arteries. A stroke involving the anterior cerebral artery may affect the
anterior corpus callosum and result in apraxia (impairment of the capacity
to execute various movements) of the left arm as a consequence of the
isolation/disconnection of the language-dominant (left) hemisphere from the
right motor cortex.
A stroke involving the posterior cerebral artery or a lesion involving the
posterior corpus callosum on the left side, may result in alexia (the inability
to recognize words or to read). Visual input from the left visual field is relayed
to the right, intact visual cortex, which is isolated/disconnected from the
language-dominant (left) hemisphere. If the basilar artery is affected, which
gives rise to both the posterior cerebral arteries, infarction of the visual cortex
will be bilateral and will cause cortical blindness; however, the affected
individual is unaware that he cannot see.
A unilateral lesion in the primary motor cortex (Brodmann’s area 4) (see
Fig. 23.7A) results in paralysis of the upper and lower limbs contralateral to
the lesion. Initially, a contralateral flaccid paralysis occurs. About 2 weeks
following the lesion, the individual will regain function of the proximal limb
musculature. Lesions confined to the primary motor cortex are rare. If the
lesion also involves area 6, the paralysis will persist and spasticity (increased
muscle tone and exaggerated tendon reflexes) will appear in the distal limb
muscles. With this type of lesion, fine movements of the distal limbs (hand and
foot) will be affected most.
The corticonuclear and corticospinal tracts arising from the primary
motor cortex synapse with interneurons and lower motoneurons of the brainstem and spinal cord, respectively, which normally cause an increase in 
muscle tone. The fibers arising from the secondary motor cortex that relay
motor input to the basal ganglia and reticular formation exert an inhibitory
influence diminishing muscle tone. A lesion in the secondary motor cortex will
eliminate this inhibitory effect, and will ultimately result in muscle spasticity.
A unilateral lesion in the secondary motor cortex (Brodmann’s areas 6 and
8) (see Fig. 23.7A) results in the inability to coordinate hand movements bilaterally. The individual will have no difficulty in coordinating the same movement with both hands concurrently. However, when attempting to
perform different movements with each hand concurrently, it will be difficult
or impossible to execute.
A unilateral lesion of both the primary and secondary motor cortical areas
will produce a more severe form of contralateral paralysis.
Following trauma to the head involving the brain, scar tissue formation
in the brain often results in epileptic seizures. A lesion of the primary motor
cortex, with subsequent scar tissue formation, results in Jacksonian epileptic
seizures. In this type of seizure convulsions may occur only in a certain part of
the body, or additional parts of the body may be involved as well, depending
on the site of the primary motor cortex that is affected by the lesion.
Normally, stimulation of the frontal eye field results in deviation of both eyes
toward the contralateral side. A unilateral lesion in the frontal eye field
(Brodmann’s area 8) results in both eyes deviating to the side ipsilateral to the
lesion. In addition, the affected individual will be unable to turn the eyes
contralateral to the lesion. The effects of frontal eye field lesions are not
permanent.
A unilateral lesion in Broca’s area (Brodmann’s areas 44 and 45) (see
Fig. 23.11) of speech in the dominant cerebral hemisphere results in Broca’s
(motor, expressive, nonfluent) aphasia (G. a, “absence;” phasis, “speech”).
An individual with this condition has difficulty expressing a thought, is
nonfluent, and speaks slowly and with difficulty, although he does not have a
lower motoneuron lesion innervating the muscles used in phonation, and these
muscles are normal. In addition, his use of words is distorted. He only uses the
main or necessary words of a sentence (this is referred to as telegraphic
speech). An individual who has a severe form of Broca’s aphasia is incapable
of speaking. This is known as mutism. Although spoken and written language
comprehension in Broca’s aphasia is a relatively preserved skill, it is still
affected by the lesion. Interestingly, the individual is aware that what he is
saying makes no sense. As mentioned earlier, Broca’s area is involved in the
planning of motor activity that is necessary for words to be produced. Broca’s
area projects this information to the premotor cortex where motor activity
is planned and relayed to the primary motor cortex, which initiates the movements necessary to produce speech. A lesion in Broca’s area will disrupt the
Broca’s area input to the premotor cortex. Broca’s aphasia also impairs an
individual’s ability to express a thought or concept by writing it down. This is
known as agraphia (G. a, “absence;” graphein, “to write”).
A unilateral lesion in Wernicke’s area in the dominant hemisphere (usually
the left hemisphere), involving Brodmann’s areas 22, 37, 39, and 40 (see
Fig. 23.11), results in Wernicke’s (sensory, receptive, fluent) aphasia. Since
this area plays a role in the comprehension and formulation of language, an
individual with a severe form of this condition has difficulty comprehending
the spoken word and is unable to read (alexia: G. a, “absence;” lexis, “word”)
or write in understandable language (agraphia), even though the visual and
auditory systems are normal. Even if speech is fluent, and the patient can speak
with ease, the combination and order of the words selected is meaningless
and makes no sense to him or others. This is referred to as fluent paraphasic
speech (“word salad”). Interestingly, this individual is unaware of his deficiencies. In milder forms of Wernicke’s aphasia, an individual may use the wrong
word (e.g., “airplane” for “bird”) or use a word that sounds like the word he
intended to say in a sentence (such as “cook” instead of “book”).
A lesion affecting both Wernicke’s and Broca’s areas in the dominant
hemisphere, results in a severe condition referred to as global aphasia. An
affected individual is unable to comprehend what he hears or reads, cannot
write, and in addition is unable to formulate normal language.
A lesion in the arcuate fasciculus component of the superior longitudinal
fasciculus will interrupt the connection between Brocas’s and Wernicke’s are
as (see Fig. 23.11), the two language areas, and will result in conduction
aphasia. An individual with this type of lesion is able to comprehend what he
hears (since Wernicke’s area is intact) and his language expression is fluent;
however, he has difficulty processing what he hears and then formulating a
proper response.
Lesions involving other afferent fibers from various cortical areas terminating
in Broca’s or Wernicke’s areas also produce aphasic syndromes, referred to as
transcortical aphasias. The lesions are extrinsic and do not involve Broca’s or
Wernicke’s language areas. However, affected individuals present symptoms
characteristic of Broca’s or Wernicke’s aphasia as a consequence of the lack of
input to the language areas, which is essential for normal linguistic function
and capacity.
A unilateral lesion in the primary somesthetic area (Brodmann’s areas 3, 1,
and 2) (see Fig. 23.7A) results in contralateral loss of two-point discrimination, graphesthesia (the ability to recognize letters or numbers as they are
stroked on the skin), and stereognosis (the ability to determine the size,
shape, and texture of an object following tactile examination), as well as the
loss of vibratory and position sense. In addition, the significance of the qualitative and quantitative perception of the stimulus is diminished or absent.
Usually, pain, temperature, and light touch sensation are only minimally
impaired; however, the individual is unable to localize the stimulus.
A lesion in the secondary somesthetic area results in minimal sensory loss
(provided that the primary somesthetic cortex is intact). However, since the
secondary somesthetic area plays an important role in the memory of
somatosensory information and sensory integration, the individual has a
condition referred to as agnosia (G. a, “absence;” gnosis, “knowing”).
Agnosias are classified according to the particular secondary (association) cortex affected.
If there is a lesion in the secondary somesthetic cortex the deficits resulting
from the lesion are referred to as astereognosis and tactile agnosia. An
individual with this type of lesion (which involves the secondary sensory cortex
representing the contralateral hand) is unable to identify a familiar object such
as a spoon placed in his palm while his eyes are closed. Although he can feel
the object in his palm, and information about it (such as its size, shape, weight,
and texture) is transmitted to the primary sensory cortex, he is unable to identify it as the sensory association cortex (which stores tactile sensory information based on prior experiences, with a spoon in this case) is not functioning.
Thus, this new information cannot be assembled and compared to stored
information and matched, which is necessary for the identification of the object.
Astereognosis does not only affect an individual’s ability to recognize
objects without looking at them, but also results in him experiencing a loss of
awareness of the position of parts of his body contralateral to the lesion. A condition, referred to as cortical neglect, is a severe form of astereognosis, in
which the affected individual ignores or denies the presence of one side of his
body. This condition most frequently results from an extensive lesion in the
superior aspect of the nondominant parietal lobule (the posterior parietal
association cortex: Brodmann’s areas 5, 7, 39, and 40). Since the individual
does not recognize certain parts of his body as being his, he will not wash his
left hand, or shave the left side of his face, etc.
A unilateral lesion in the primary visual area (Brodmann’s area 17) (see
Fig. 23.7A) results in blindness of the contralateral visual field, referred to as a
contralateral homonymous hemianopsia. If destruction of the primary
visual cortex is the result of a vascular lesion, macular sparing may occur,
that is, central vision is unaffected. It is believed that this is due to the presence
of collateral anastomotic channels between the middle and posterior cerebral
arteries.
A bilateral lesion in the primary visual area results in complete blindness,
also referred to as cortical blindness.
A lesion in the association visual areas (Brodmann’s areas 18 and 19) (see
Fig. 23.7A) (usually bilaterally) results in visual agnosia. Since the visual
pathways and primary visual cortex are intact, the individual is able to “see”
an object or person. However, although he may be looking at a familiar object
(such as a toaster) or person, he is unable to identify them, or describe the
function of the toaster. An individual with visual agnosia may recognize an
object one day but not the next. Also, he may recognize certain familiar objects
but not others. Interestingly, an object may be identified by other senses, such
as touch.
Dyslexia is a type of visual agnosia. Individuals with this disorder are
unable to read and write words, although they can see and recognize letters.
A unilateral lesion in the primary auditory area results in partial deafness.
This is due to a bilateral deficit in hearing since auditory information arising in
each ear is relayed to the cortical primary auditory area bilaterally. Usually,
individuals with this type of lesion experience a greater loss of hearing in the
ear contralateral to the cortical lesion. Recall that a greater number of fibers
relaying auditory input to the cortex decussate, whereas a lesser number of
fibers project ipsilaterally. An individual with this lesion has difficulty in localizing sounds on the opposite side.
A bilateral lesion of the primary auditory area results in total deafness.
A unilateral lesion in the auditory association area of the dominant (left) hemisphere results in receptive aphasia. A unilateral lesion in the nondominant
(right) hemisphere results in amusia, a condition in which the individual is
unable to recognize familiar voices or music.
A bilateral lesion of the auditory association area results in auditory
agnosia in which the individual does not recognize complex sounds.
A unilateral lesion in the superior temporal gyrus (see Fig. 23.1) results
in subjective vertigo, in which the individual has the strange experience of
feeling as though he is spinning around his environment.
In contrast, a unilateral lesion in the parietal lobe in the lower margin of
the intraparietal sulcus results in objective vertigo, in which the individual
feels as though the environment is revolving around him.
An individual with a lesion in the prefrontal association cortex displays
changes in various personality traits as well as changes in higher order functions and/or executive functions such as judgement, creativity, analytic thinking, responsibility, etc. These are more pronounced if the lesion is bilateral. In
addition, the individual behaves in a manner that is socially inappropriate. His
behavior is characterized by a lack of self-respect or concern for others, he
loses the social skills necessary to interact with others, is easily distracted, and
is emotionally unstable.
Dorsolateral convexity lesions result in apathetic, lifeless behavior;
orbitofrontal lesions result in disinhibited behavior and poor judgement; left
frontal lesions result in depressed behavior; and right frontal lesions result in
manic behavior.
A unilateral lesion in the parietal lobe of the dominant hemisphere results in
various conditions collectively known as apraxias (G. a, “absence;” praxia,
“action”). Apraxia is a condition in which an individual’s ability to perform
certain skilled movements that are normally triggered by a stimulus is impaired,
although the individual does not have any sensory or motor deficits.
A unilateral lesion in the supramarginal gyrus (Brodmann’s area 40) (see
Fig. 23.1) of the parietal lobe results in an ideomotor apraxia, in which the
individual’s ability to perform a desired activity is impaired. For example,
although the individual can perform certain motor activities, his impairment
prevents him from doing them on command. Ideational apraxia is a condition in which the individual is able to perform certain activities separately, for
example picking up a glass, filling it with water, and drinking it; however,
when asked to perform these activities in that sequence, he is unable to do
them.
Lesions in the supramarginal and angular gyri (see Fig. 23.1) of the dominant hemisphere result in one or more of the following clinical symptoms
of Gerstmann’s syndrome: (i) dysgraphia (G. dys, “faulty;” graphein, “to
write”), a condition in which the affected individual has difficulty writing
although the sensory and motor systems are intact; (ii) dyscalculia, a condition in which the individual has difficulty making calculations, right–left
confusion, and finger agnosia (in which the individual does not know one
finger from another); and (iii) dyslexia, in which the lesion interferes with the
ability to read.
Lesions in the parietal association area that involve the inferior parietal lobule
result in the following deficits: (i) distorted concepts of body image, in which
the individual is not aware of the left side of his body (e.g., does not shave the
left side of his face, does not wash the left side of his body, etc.); (ii) a lack of
awareness that he is ill; (iii) disorientation, for example he does not know
where objects are located in his house, or where locations are on a map; and
(iv) an inability to draw simple figures.
The onset of seizures in a
previously healthy individual
without a history of seizure mandates
careful evaluation. Brain imaging is
required, preferably with MRI (a CT is
done in the emergency room setting to
look for a cerebral hemorrhage). MRI
in the patient discussed revealed a
meningioma over the midlateral aspect
of the left hemisphere, in the vicinity of
the primary motor cortical area.
The first seizure experienced by this
patient was a focal motor, or simple
partial, seizure. Normal consciousness
was maintained and motor manifestations occured only on the contralateral
side to where the brain focus of the
seizure was. In this case, the seizure focus
began in or around the facial part of the
left primary motor cortex and spread
progressively to involve the upper
extremity and then the lower extremity
part of the primary motor cortex (refer to
the somatotopic representation of the face
and upper and lower limbs on the motor
homunculus; see Fig. 23.9). This is
referred to as a Jacksonian march or
Jacksonian seizure. It is rare to see the
full march of clonic activity, but it is
historically and conceptually important
to know about it.
The second seizure almost certainly
had its onset in the same spot as the first
one, except that this one spread rapidly
and became generalized, i.e., involving
both hemispheres. This generalization
results in loss of consciousness and often
generalized convulsions (generalized
tonic-clonic seizures). Tongue biting
and/or urinary incontinence is also often
associated with generalized tonic-clonic
seizures. When there is alteration of
consciousness with a seizure but it is not
generalized, it is called complex partial.
Seizures are a cortical phenomenon.
A seizure indicates an abnormality of the
electrophysiology of the cortical neurons.
The full electrophysiology of seizure
initiation and progression is beyond the
scope of this discussion. The cortical
neurons become hyperexcitable and
typically produce “positive” symptoms
rather than symptoms indicating loss of
function. The manifestations of seizures
are widely varied, and depend on which
part of the cerebral cortex is affected.
The most “epileptogenic” regions, in
descending order, are the temporal
lobes, frontal lobes, parietal lobes, and
occipital lobes.
Seizures are either primary or
secondary. A secondary etiology is
more common with new-onset seizures
in adults, and can be caused by strokes,
tumors, vascular malformations,
hemorrhage, and any other lesion causing
cortical irritation. Subcortical lesions do
not cause seizures. Primary seizures are
more common in children, who often
“outgrow” them, and there is no
identifiable lesion on brain imaging.
There is often a hereditary component.
However, seizures in children can
certainly be secondary and new-onset
seizures in adults can be primary (or at
least show no identifiable lesion).

Question 1: Although these two anatomical components
of the nervous system are treated as if they were separate
entities, they are in fact intimately related to one another.
Although the central nervous system is housed in the skull
and spinal column, many of its neurons, whose cell bodies
are located in the brain and in the spinal cord, have processes
that leave the confines of their bony housing and enter other
regions of the body. Here they are referred to as nerve fibers
of the peripheral nervous system. Therefore, in many
instances, the peripheral nervous system is an extension of
the central nervous system.
Question 3: Oligodendroglia are one of the types of neuroglia
located in the central nervous system. These cells act as
“insulators,” protecting neurons from coming into contact
with extraneous cells and/or elements located in the central
nervous system. Since most neurons have numerous processes, many of which may be quite long, each neuron
requires a large number of oligodendroglia to form that
physical barrier.
Question 5: There is little voluntary control over a two
neuron reflex arc. As an example, the patellar reflex, which is
a two neuron reflex arc, cannot be suppressed by an individual.
However, due to the presence of the interneuron in a three
neuron reflex arc, the motor action of the three neuron reflex
arc can be suppressed. As an example, the normal reflex in
response to a needle prick to the finger tip is to withdraw the
finger from harm’s way; however, if the finger is being
pricked in a physician’s office for the purposes of a blood test,
the patient, although aware of the pain, will (usually) suppress the withdrawal component of the reflex.

Question 1: The process of transforming the embryoblast to
a trilaminar germ disc is known as gastrulation. This process establishes the presence of the three germ layers—the
ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm—each of which will
be responsible for the development of specific structures
of the body. As an example, the ectoderm gives rise to the
central nervous system, the mesoderm to the development of
the vertebral column, and the endoderm to the epithelium of
the gut.
Question 3: Genes code for the synthesis of specific proteins,
many of which are enzymes that are responsible for the
occurrence of specific events. Certain genes have been conserved through evolution and their study in lower organisms,
such as the fruitfly, has provided information that is directly
applicable to the developmental processes of higher organisms, including humans. A family of genes, known as the
homeobox genes, code for the synthesis of transcription
factors, proteins that bind to and regulate the expression of
other genes.
The time sequence of the events controlled by products of
these homeobox genes and by growth factors are essential for
normal development because certain genes can be switched
on only if some other genes have already been activated and
if still other genes have not as yet been switched on. In other
words, there are “windows of opportunity” for the occurrence of certain events and if that timeframe is missed then
development will not proceed normally. Therefore, these
homeobox genes become activated in a specific order, and
their sequential expression establishes a pattern of developmental events. In order for development to progress in a
normal manner, cells must interact with each other. These
interactions may involve the physical contact of two cells or
the release of a particular substance by one cell, referred to as
the signaling cell, to act as a message for the other cell, known
as the target cell.
Question 5: Both develop as an outgrowth of the forming
brain and an invagination of the ectoderm.
The pituitary: The infundibulum of the diencephalon is
a downward evagination of the floor of the third ventricle.
As the infundibulum grows down, it meets an ectodermal
diverticulum of the oral cavity, known as Rathke’s pouch.
These two structures fuse with each other to form the 
pituitary gland (hypohysis). The neurohypophysis (median
eminence, stalk, and pars nervosa) arises from the infundibulum, whereas the adenohypophysis (pars tuberalis, pars
distalis, and pars intermedia) derives from Rathke’s pouch.
A small colloid-filled cleft frequently remains as a vestige of
the lumen of Rathke’s pouch, in the pars intermedia.
The eye: During the third week of gestation, the ventrolateral wall on each side of the future diencephalon gives rise
to an optic vesicle. These hollow vesicles grow in a lateral
direction; they reach and induce the ectoderm to form the
lens placode, the precursor of the lens of the eye. The optic
vesicle invaginates to form a two-layered structure, known as
the optic cup, which gives rise to the nervous and pigmented
layers of the retina; the connection between the optic cup
and the forming brain becomes known as the optic stalk, the
future optic nerve. The rim of the optic cup encircles the
prospective lens to form the iris.

Question 1: Although the soma of a neuron is relatively large,
the axon and dendrites of many neurons possess a lot more
cytoplasm than does the cell body. Therefore, the soma is
responsible for the formation of much of the protein, macromolecules, and neurotransmitter material that the entire cell
requires. Because of this high biosynthetic demand, the
neuron must be equipped with the biosynthetic machinery
to manufacture these substances. Since the soma is the
only expanded portion of the neuron, its organelles must be
localized at that site.
Question 3: Since the intracellular concentration of K+ is
greater than the extracellular concentration, potassium is
driven by a concentration gradient from the cell into the
extracellular space. Potassium ions travel through ion channels that are not gated and are known as K+ leak channels.
Because only K+ ions are permitted through these channels
an electrical imbalance is established (more positive ions are
present on the extracellular aspect of the membrane than on
the intracellular aspect). At the point where the concentration
gradient’s “desire” to push potassium out of the cell and the
electrical imbalance’s “desire” to return potassium into the
cell equal each other, the net flow of K+ ions becomes zero.
This does not mean that there is no flow of K+ ions across the
membrane, it simply means that the same number of K+ ions
flow into the cell as out of the cell. The establishment of this
equilibrium potential (modified for K+ ions) is described by
the Nernst equation. This equation can be applied for all ions,
and is solved for the most common ions. However, the
Nernst equation assumes that only the particular ion in question is permitted to traverse the cell membrane. However,
this is not a true situation as ion channels of the plasma membrane are open simultaneously, thus permitting several ions
to cross the plasmalemma. The Goldman equation describes
the membrane potential as a function of the relative permeability of the cell membrane to more than a single species of
ions. Since the neuron membrane is influenced by at least
three ions—Na+, K+, and Cl–
—all three are considered in the
Goldman equation. The Goldman equation is very similar to
the Nernst equation, but it considers more than just a single
ion type. It is interesting to note that the two equations would
be identical if the permeability of two of the three ions were
zero. Therefore, the Goldman equation describes the complexity of the existing situation better than does the Nernst
equation and provides a more realistic prediction of resting
membrane potential for neurons.
Question 5: An increase in the number of postsynaptic potentials (e.g., by the rapid release of multiple quanta of chemical
messengers from a single axon terminal or from many axon
terminals on the same neuron), results in their summation.
Hence, hundreds of nearly simultaneous, small postsynaptic
potentials may be necessary to achieve the threshold required
for the formation of an action potential when those currents
arrive at the initial segment of the axon. Generally, inhibitory
synapses are closer to the initial segment of the axon than
are excitatory synapses. Since inhibitory synapses function
to hyperpolarize the postsynaptic membrane, they tend to
diminish the flow of currents formed at the excitatory potential making it more difficult to reach threshold levels at
the initial segment of the axon. This sequence of events is
referred to as the summation of inhibitory postsynaptic
potentials and excitatory postsynaptic potentials.

Question 1: The neurotransmitter substances that bind
specifically to ligand-gated ion channels cause those channels
to open directly, thus the target neuron responds immediately, resulting in an ionotropic effect. Those neurotransmitter substances that bind to G-protein-coupled receptors
exert an indirect effect on ion channels. Since the G-proteins
act as intermediaries, the effect on the target neuron is slower
than in the previous instance. Thus, these neurotransmitter
substances are known as neuromodulators, and they are said
to exert a metabotropic effect.
Question 3: Biogenic amines are derived from amino acids
and exert a metabotropic effect. They bind to G-proteincoupled receptors and activate the second messenger system
within the target neuron, which in turn will open ion channels. These substances include the catecholamines dopamine,
norepinephrine, and epinephrine as well as histamine and
serotonin. Upon release from the presynaptic terminal,
biogenic amines are endocytosed by the nerve terminals
and glial cells, and are digested by the enzymes cathecol
O-methyltranferase and monoamine oxidase. In this fashion,
each release of these neurotransmitters is responsible for only
a limited number of depolarizations/hyperpolarizations.
Question 5: Acetylcholine is a neurotransmitter substance
localized both in the central and peripheral nervous systems.
It is synthesized in the presynaptic terminal from acetyl CoA
and choline by choline acetyl transferase, the rate-limiting
enzyme of its synthesis. Acetylcholine has the ability to bind
to both ionotropic receptors and metabotropic receptors.
In skeletal muscle it is an excitatory neurotransmitter substance, binding directly to ligand-gated sodium (nicotinic
receptors) as well as to potassium ion channels, and causing
them to open. In cardiac muscle it is an inhibitory neurotransmitter substance, binding to G-protein-linked receptors
(muscarinic receptors) that facilitate the opening of potassium ion channels.
Question 1: The cervical and lumbar enlargements are necessary to provide space for the many neurons that are required
for the innervation of the upper and lower extremities,
respectively. Because the upper extremity is much more
complex in humans, in that the hands and fingers possess a
very rich nerve supply, the cervical enlargement is greater
than the lumbar enlargement.
Question 3: White matter is composed mostly of myelinated
and unmyelinated nerve fibers, which bring information into
the central nervous system and transmit it to higher levels,
and transmit information from higher levels to the spinal
cord and to the muscles and glands. Based on the presence of
sulci and fissures, the white matter is subdivided into three
major columns, dorsal, lateral, and ventral funiculi. Within
the funiculi the nerve fibers that have similar destinations are
arranged in bundles known as tracts (fasciculi).
Question 5: The spinal cord equals the length of the vertebral
canal only until the end of the first trimester of prenatal life.
Thereafter the trunk elongates much faster, so that by the
time of birth the conus medullaris is only at the level of the
third lumbar vertebra and in the adult it extends only as far
as the caudal aspect of the first lumbar vertebra. Therefore,
lower levels of the spinal cord segments are displaced
rostrally in relation to their corresponding vertebral levels.
Because of this differential growth, the subarachnoid space
caudal to the conus medullaris, known as the lumbar cistern,
is devoid of spinal cord. It is this space that may be used
by physicians to remove cerebrospinal fluid for diagnostic
purposes without causing injury to the spinal cord.
Question 1: They are the commissural, projection, and
association fibers. Commissural fibers connect the right
and left cerebral hemispheres. Projection fibers connect the
cerebral cortex to lower levels, namely the corpus striatum,
diencephalon, brainstem, and spinal cord; the majority of
these fibers are axons of pyramidal cells and fusiform
neurons. Association fibers are restricted to a single
hemisphere.
Question 3: Peduncles are large fiber tracts that connect parts
of the brain to the brainstem. There are two separate groups
of peduncles, the cerebral and cerebellar peduncles. The
cerebral peduncles are two very large, thick fiber bundles
that connect the cerebral hemispheres to the brainstem. The
cerebellar peduncles are three pairs of fiber bundles that
connect the cerebellum to the midbrain, pons, and medulla
of the brainstem.
Question 1: The dura mater of the spinal cord differs from
that of the cranial dura mater because the spinal dura is composed only of the meningeal layer. The periosteal layer is the
true periosteum of the vertebral canal and is separated from
the meningeal layer by a loose connective tissue and fat-filled
epidural space.
Question 3: Although the brain itself may not feel pain, the
dura mater possesses a very rich sensory nerve supply,
derived mostly from cranial nerve V (the trigeminal nerve)
but also from the first three cervical spinal nerves that serve
the dura mater of the posterior cranial fossa. It is these
sensory fibers that become stimulated and the patient may
experience severe pain.
Question 5: Arachnoid granulations are small, mushroomshaped evaginations of the arachnoid that protrude into the
lumen of the dural sinuses. Most of the arachnoid granulations are associated with the lacunae lateralis—diverticula of
the superior sagittal sinus—although some jut into the lumen
of the sinus. The core of an arachnoid granulation is continuous with the subarachnoid space and is surrounded by the
epithelioid layer of the arachnoid and the dura, forming a
membrane that is two cell layers thick. As the arachnoid
granulation evaginates into the lacuna lateralis it is invested
by some cellular and collagenous elements of the meningeal
dura mater, which in turn is surrounded by the endothelial
lining of the blood vessel. Cerebrospinal fluid from the
subarachnoid space enters into the core of the arachnoid
granulation and from there penetrates, probably by osmosis,
the epithelioid layers of the arachnoid granulations and
the endothelial lining to escape into the lacuna lateralis.
Therefore, the function of the arachnoid granulations is transporting cerebrospinal fluid manufactured by the choroid
plexuses of the brain ventricles into the vascular system. It is
important to note that although the arachnoid granulations
protrude into the venous sinuses, they are always separated from the blood by the endothelial lining of the dural
sinus/lacuna lateralis.
Question 1: Radicular arteries are extremely important for
the vascularization of the spinal cord because, with the
exception of the cervical region, the anterior and posterior
spinal arteries by themselves are unable to provide an
adequate vascular supply to the spinal cord. Therefore, an
injury to a spinal nerve damages not only the afferent and
efferent fibers of a particular spinal cord level, but may also
damage the segmental white and gray matter by producing
ischemic conditions due to the reduction in blood supply
from the radicular artery serving that region.
Question 3: The posterior communicating artery connects the
cerebral portion of the internal carotid artery to the posterior
cerebral branch of the basilar artery. The right and left arteries are not identical, in that one is frequently smaller than the
other, and, in fact, one may be entirely absent or doubled. The
main function of this vessel is to ensure a viable blood supply
to the brain in case the internal carotid or vertebral artery
becomes occluded. However, it also has central branches that
pierce the region of the base of the cerebrum and serve part of
the posterior limb of the internal capsule, the medial aspect of
the thalamus, and the tissue forming the lateral border of the
third ventricle.
Question 5: Four major vessels—the two internal carotid
arteries and the two vertebral arteries—bring blood to the
brain. Although numerous veins receive blood from the brain,
they all deliver their contents into the venous sinuses of the
meninges. The venous sinuses, in turn, deliver their blood into
the superior bulb of the right and left internal jugular veins.
Question 1: Preganglionic sympathetic soma are located in
the lateral horn of the spinal cord only at levels T1 through
L2, therefore the preganglionic fibers are located only in the
corresponding spinal nerves. They leave the spinal nerves via
the white rami communicantes to join the sympathetic chain
ganglia. There they may synapse with postganglionic sympathetic soma at various levels along the sympathetic trunk.
Postganglionic sympathetic fibers of these soma re-enter the
spinal nerve (through gray rami communicantes) at the level
that leads to the region of their destination. Since there are 31
pairs of spinal nerves there has to be a corresponding gray
rami communicantes for each spinal nerve.
Question 3: The autonomic nervous system is designed in
such a fashion that preganglionic fibers can synapse only
with their own postganglionic soma, therefore a preganglionic parasympathetic fiber cannot synapse with a postganglionic sympathetic soma. The postganglionic soma can
thus only be stimulated by its own preganglionic neuron.
However, a target cell, such as the conducting system of the
heart, may be innervated by both postganglionic sympathetic
and parasympathetic fibers and the target cell has to know
whether it is responding to a sympathetic or a parasympathetic message.
Question 5: As feces accumulate, the sigmoid colon distends
and the individual becomes conscious of the need to defecate,
but the feces are retained in the colon by the two sphincter
muscles, the internal smooth muscle sphincter and the external skeletal muscle sphincter. The former is supplied by postganglionic sympathetic fibers from the hypogastric plexus as
well as by postganglionic parasympathetic fibers located in
Auerbach’s plexus (whose preganglionic fibers arise from the
sacral spinal cord). The external sphincter is supplied by the
somatic nervous system, namely the inferior rectal nerve.
Thus, when the sigmoid colon becomes distended, the internal sphincter muscle relaxes (due to the parasympathetic
nerve supply) and at the same time the external sphincter
muscle contracts, preventing the feces from exiting the
bowel. While the individual is asleep, this contraction of the
external sphincter muscle is a reflex response. When the individual is awake, the contraction of the external sphincter is a
voluntary response.
Question 1: Some receptors respond quickly and maximally
at the onset of the stimulus, but stop responding even if the
stimulus continues; these are known as rapidly adapting
(phasic) receptors. They are essential in responding to
changes but they ignore ongoing processes, such as when one
wears a wristwatch and ignores its presence and continuous
pressure on the skin of the wrist. However, there are other
receptors, slowly adapting (tonic) receptors, that continue to
respond as long as the stimulus is present.
Question 3: It is the degree of stretching that is proportional
to the load placed on the muscle. The larger the load, the
more strongly the spindles are depolarized and the more
extrafusal muscle fibers are in turn activated.
Question 5: Pain perception is not only processed in the primary somatosensory cortex, but also in the anterior cingulate
and anterior insular cortices. Recent studies support the
finding that pain sensation persists following a lesion to the
primary somatosensory cortex as a result of these additional
cortical representations of pain.
Question 1: By alpha and gamma motoneuron coactivation.
When the gross muscle contracts (following stimulation by
alpha motoneurons), the contractile portions of the intrafusal
fibers undergo a simultaneous corresponding contraction
(following stimulation by gamma motoneurons), stretching
their central noncontractile portion. The muscle spindles are
then ready to detect muscle stretch when the muscle becomes
stretched from the contracted state or from any length.
Therefore, when the gross muscle begins to stretch from the
contracted state, the intrafusal fibers will be immediately
stretched and their afferent (sensory) fibers will fire, informing the central nervous system that muscle stretching is
occurring.
Question 3: Although the upper motoneurons arising from
the primary motor cortex may be damaged, the tectospinal,
reticulospinal, and vestibulospinal tracts and the upper
motoneurons contributed by the secondary motor cortex
provide a motor input to the interneurons and lower
motoneurons innervating the skeletal muscles.
Question 5: The cortical group, which includes the lateral
corticospinal tract.
Question 1: The limbic system consists of a group of cortical
and subcortical structures that are involved in the processing
of emotions. Via its connections to the basal ganglia, the
limbic system can influence the underlying motivational
aspects of behavior or movement. Here is an example of the
role played by the limbic system in movement. The pleasant
aroma of freshly brewed coffee and baked cinnamon rolls are
enough to motivate anyone of us to walk toward the coffee
and cinnamon rolls and taste them by lifting the coffee cup
and roll to take a sip and a few bites. Tasting the cinnamon
roll may elicit certain facial expressions that may indicate to
those looking at us that we are enjoying the delicious tasting
cinnamon roll. Furthermore, the warm cinnamon aroma may
evoke fond memories of the first time we tasted a cinnamon
roll. In this example, the olfactory system (mediating the
sense of smell), the limbic system (processing emotions and
memory), and the basal ganglia involved in movement are all
interconnected.
Question 3: Normally, the subthalamic nucleus projects
glutaminergic (excitatory) fibers to the two output nuclei of
the basal ganglia, the medial segment of the globus pallidus
and the substantia nigra pars reticulata, which in turn send
inhibitory projections to the thalamus. Thalamocortical fibers
that are excitatory project to the motor cortex. Projections up
to this point are ipsilateral; however, the upper motoneurons
arising from the cortex decussate in the pyramids, thus affecting the opposite side of the body. A lesion in the subthalamic
nucleus would result in disinhibition (excitation) of the
thalamus, which in turn becomes overactive, overstimulating the motor cortex, which in turn results in hyperkinetic
symptoms in the opposite side of the body.
Question 5: If excessive l-DOPA is administered to an
individual with Parkinson’s disease, the individual will
manifest choreic movements. l-DOPA administered to a
patient with Huntington’s disease will intensify the choreic
movements.
Question 1: The cerebellar efferents and the descending
motor pathways (i.e., the corticospinal and rubrospinal
tracts) are crossed. Thus a lesion in the right cerebellar hemisphere via its efferents (which decussate) affects the left side
of the brain. As the left corticospinal tract descends to the
pyramids, most of its fibers cross to the opposite (right) side
as the lateral corticospinal tract, terminating in the right
spinal cord, and synapsing with lower motoneurons that
innervate the muscles on the right side of the body. The
corticorubral fibers arising from the left side of the brain
descend to the left red nucleus, which in turn gives rise to
the rubrospinal tract whose fibers cross to the right side in
the midbrain. The right rubrospinal tract will descend to
terminate on lower motoneurons in the right spinal cord that
innervate muscles on the right side of the body.
Question 3: The hemispheric (lateral) zone of the cerebellum.
It is interesting to note that although both motor and cognitive functions are affected by the consumption of alcohol, the
cells of the cerebellum are very susceptible to the effects of
alcohol. This becomes apparent by the awkward, ataxic,
uncoordinated execution of movements by the intoxicated
individual, especially when the eyes are closed.
Question 5: A decrease in resistance to passive manipulation
resulting in excess movement of the limbs (referred to as
“rag-doll appearance”) is caused by the absence of cerebellar
influence on the stretch reflex.
Question 1: Nociceptive input from the body is transmitted
to the spinal cord dorsal horn by first order pseudounipolar
neurons whose cell bodies are located in the dorsal root
ganglia. Second order neurons, whose cell bodies are located
in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord, give rise to axons that
ascend as the spinothalamic or spinoreticular tracts. The
spinothalamic tract terminates in the ventral posterior
lateral nucleus of the thalamus, but also sends collaterals to
the brainstem reticular formation. The spinoreticular tract
terminates in the reticular formation, and also sends collateral to the thalamus.
Nociceptive input from the orofacial region is transmitted
to the pons by the pseudounipolar neurons whose cell bodies
are located in the trigeminal ganglion. Fibers conveying nociceptive input descend in the spinal tract of the trigeminal
nerve to terminate in the subnucleus caudalis of the spinal
nucleus of the trigeminal. This nucleus also receives the central processes of sensory neurons of other cranial nerves
relaying nociceptive input from structures in the head.
Second order neurons housed in the subnucleus caudalis
cross to the opposite side of the pons, and join the ventral
trigeminal lemniscus to terminate in the ventral posterior
medial nucleus of the thalamus with collaterals to the reticular formation.
Question 3: Through their ascending fibers the neurons of
the medial zone influence the autonomic nervous system,
and the level of arousal. Via their descending fibers, which
join the reticulospinal tracts, the neurons of the medial zone
influence the motor control of the axial and proximal limb
musculature.
Question 5: Lesions damaging the midbrain reticular formation can cause hypersomnia associated with slow respiration.
When the midbrain is compressed with consequent extensive
damage of the ARAS pathways, a comatose state ensues.
Question 1: Interruption of the parasympathetic innervation
of the sphincter pupillae muscle causes the pupil ipsilateral to
the lesion to remain dilated (mydriasis) and to not respond
(constrict) to a flash of light. This may be the first clinical
sign of intracranial pressure on the general visceral efferent
fibers of the oculomotor nerve. The ciliary muscle is also
nonfunctional due to interruption of its parasympathetic
innervation, and cannot accommodate the lens for near
vision (that is, cannot focus on near objects).
Question 3: The abducens nucleus innervates a single
extraocular muscle, the lateral rectus. A lesion in the
abducens nucleus damages not only the general somatic
efferent (GSE) motor fibers innervating the lateral rectus
muscle, but also the internuclear fibers projecting to the
contralateral oculomotor nucleus, that synapse with the
motoneurons that innervate the medial rectus.
A lesion in the abducens nucleus that damages the
GSE motor fibers innervating the lateral rectus results in
paralysis of the lateral rectus muscle, which normally
abducts the eye. Since the individual will be unable to move
the ipsilateral eye laterally, it deviates medially as a result of
the unopposed action of the medial rectus. The individual
can turn the ipsilateral eye from its medial position to the
center (looking straight ahead), but not beyond it. This
paralysis results in medial strabismus (convergent, internal
strabismus, esotropia). Since the eyes become misaligned, the
individual experiences horizontal diplopia (double vision).
The diplopia is greatest when looking toward the side of the
lesion and is reduced by looking towards the unaffected side
since the visual axes become parallel. The individual realizes
that the diplopia is minimized by turning his head slightly so
that the chin is pointing toward the side of the lesion. Bilateral
abducent nerve lesion results in the individual becoming
“cross-eyed.”
A lesion involving the abducens nucleus damaging
the internuclear neurons results in the inability to turn the
opposite eye medially as the individual attempts to gaze
toward the side of the lesion. This condition is referred to as
lateral gaze paralysis.
Question 5: A lesion in the vicinity of the abducens nucleus
that involves the entire ipsilateral abducens nucleus as well
as the decussating medial longitudinal fasciculus fibers arising from the contralateral abducens nucleus, results in a rare
condition referred to as “one-and-a-half.”
If, for example, a lesion is present in the vicinity of the left
abducens nucleus the following will occur.
1 The GSE motoneurons whose axons form the left abducent nerve innervating the left lateral rectus are damaged.
Therefore that lateral rectus muscle is paralyzed.
2 The internuclear neurons housed in the left abducens
nucleus are also damaged. Therefore their crossing fibers
do not form excitatory synapses with the motoneurons of
the contralateral oculomotor nucleus that innervate the
right medial rectus muscle.
3 The crossing fibers of the internuclear neurons arising
from the contralateral (right) abducens nucleus are also
damaged. Thus they do not form excitatory synapses with
the motoneurons of the left oculomotor nucleus that
innervate the left medial rectus.
Therefore, when attempting to gaze to the left, the left eye
will not abduct and the right eye will not adduct during conjugate horizontal gaze to the left. When attempting to gaze to
the right, the right eye responds normally, that is it is able to
abduct, whereas the left eye will not be able to adduct during
conjugate horizontal gaze to the right.
It is important to note that the innervation to all the extraocular muscles of both eyes is intact, except to one—the
left lateral rectus. If you ask this individual to look at a
near object placed directly in front of his face, both eyes will
converge since both medial recti and their innervation
(branches of the oculomotor nerve) are intact. This type of
lesion becomes apparent only during conjugate horizontal
eye movement.
Question 7: The first cranial nerve that is likely to be damaged from a growing pituitary tumor is the optic nerve. The
decussating axons at the optic chiasma will be compressed,
followed by the nondecussating fibers. If the tumor becomes
very large, the cranial nerves located on the medial wall of the
cavernous sinus (namely the oculomotor, trochlear, and
ophthalmic division of the trigeminal and the abducent
nerves) will likely be compressed and cause deficits in the
structures that these nerves innervate.
Question 1: Although light travels from the inner to the outer
layers of the retina (internal limiting membrane → pigment
epithelium), visual electrical signals are transmitted in the
opposite direction from the outer to the inner layers of the
retina (rod and cone layer → optic nerve fiber layer).
Question 3: When the right eye was illuminated, only the
consensual (left) papillary light reflex was elicited. This
indicates that a lesion may be present in the efferent limb of
the pupillary light reflex arc of the right side. When the left
eye was illuminated, again, only the left eye responded,
which indicates that the lesion may be present in the efferent
limb of the pupillary light reflex arc on the right side.
Question 5: The patient had a lesion affecting the ganglion
cell axons arising from the nasal half of each retina, which
cross at the optic chiasma over the body of the sphenoid bone.
The crossing fibers may be damaged due to compression by a
tumor of the pituitary gland.
Queston 1: The middle ear functions in the transmission and
transduction of tympanic membrane vibrations to the inner
ear (from an air to a fluid medium). The oval window and
the round window both serve necessary functions in these
processes.
Question 3: The basilar membrane is an elastic structure
exhibiting a gradual increase in width, and a decrease in
stiffness from the oval window (at the cochlear base) to the
helicotrema (at the cochlear apex). The gradual decrease
in stiffness permits this membrane to be sensitive to high
frequency vibrations near the cochlear base, and low frequency vibrations near its apex, at the helicotrema.
Question 5: The olivocochlear bundle has an inhibitory
effect on cochlear nerve activity, modulating and sharpening
auditory transmission.
Question 1: Sensory input from the visual, vestibular, and
proprioceptive systems, is integrated by the nervous system,
especially the cerebellum, to generate motor responses. These
motor responses maintain equilibrium, posture, and muscle
tone, as well as reflex movements of the eyes, all of which are
carried out at the subconscious level.
Question 3: The neuroepithelia of the cristae ampullares, macula utriculi, and macula sacculi are covered with a
gelatinous glycoprotein membrane. The stereocilia and kinocilia
are embedded in this membrane. In the utricle and saccule,
the gelatinous glycoprotein membranes overlying their macula have, on their free surface, otoconia (G., “ear dust”)—also
referred to as otoliths (G., “ear stones”)—which are crystals
consisting of calcium carbonate. Since the gelatinous glycoprotein membrane of the utricle and saccule has otoliths, it is
referred to as the otolithic membrane, and the utricle and
saccule are referred to as otolithic organs. The otoliths have a
specific gravity that is greater than that of the endolymph
which surrounds them, and they are consequently pulled by
gravity. Gravity applies a continuous linear acceleration on
the head, and thus deflects the gelatinous membrane, which
in turn stimulates the hair cells.
The glycoprotein membrane of the cristae ampullares is
dome-shaped and is called the cupula; it is devoid of crystals.
The cupula increases resistance to the flow of endolymph
and, unlike the otolithic membrane, is not influenced by gravitational forces. Instead, it responds to endolymphatic flow.
The cupula is a mechanical structure that narrows the lumen
of the canal and so increases resistance to flow. The three
cristae ampullares are enclosed in the semicircular duct
ampullae (one crista in each ampulla) and detect angular
acceleration or deceleration (rotational movement) of the
head (as in turning or tilting the head). The receptors in the
utricle and saccule (the macula utriculi and macula sacculi
within the utricle and saccule, respectively) detect spatial orientation of the head in space relative to gravity and linear
acceleration or deceleration forces.
Question 5: The vestibular nerve is unique since it is the only
cranial nerve that sends some of its first order afferent fibers
relaying sensory input directly from the peripheral receptors
to the cerebellar cortex. The vestibular nuclei and the cerebellum serve as the first relay centers of the vestibular pathway.
Question 7: When an individual fixes his gaze on (“stares at”)
an object and then begins to turn his head, for example to
the right, the eyes will reflexly (via medial longitudinal
fasciculus vestibular connections to the extraocular nuclei)
“turn” to the left (as the head is moving), which is opposite
to the direction of head movement. This turning of the eyes
(dictated by vestibular reflex connections) compensates for
shifting of the head position in order to maintain visual
fixation on an object. Without this vestibular reflex mechanism coupling head and eye movements, as the erect head
moves from a certain position (to the right or to the left) the
eyes would remain still, perceiving a changing visual field
during the head movement.
Question 1: Olfactory receptor cells, the first order bipolar
neurons of the olfactory pathway, reside in a peripheral
structure, the olfactory epithelium (instead of being housed
in a sensory ganglion). They are the only neurons that are
in direct contact with the environment and they give rise
to unmyelinated axons, the slowest impulse-conducting
axons of the central nervous system. They serve the functions of: (i) sensory receptors (chemoreceptors that become
activated by chemical stimuli in their surroundings); (ii)
transducers (generate graded potentials); and (iii) first order
neurons (relaying olfactory sensation centrally to the olfactory bulbs).
Question 3: Odorant-receptor molecules (transmembrane
G-protein-coupled receptors) are embedded in the plasmalemma of the ciliary membrane of the olfactory receptor
cells.
Question 5: The binding of an odorous substance to the
odorant-receptor protein molecules (on the ciliary membrane
of the olfactory receptor cell), stimulates the initiation of a
second messenger pathway associated with an olfactoryspecific G-protein, which subsequently stimulates adenyl
cyclase, which generates cAMP. The cAMP elevation unlocks
a cyclic nucleotide-gated cation channel embedded in the
ciliary membrane, permitting sodium and calcium cations
to pass into the cell. This stimulates the chemosensitive cilia
of the olfactory receptor cells, and a wave of depolarization
(generator potential) is propagated from the dendrites to
the cell body of the olfactory receptor cell. A high enough
depolarization triggers a nerve impulse that is propagated
along the axon of the olfactory receptor cell, centrally to the
olfactory bulb.
Question 1: The limbic lobe consists of the subcallosal, cingulate, and parahippocampal gyri, as well as the hippocampal
formation, all of which collectively form a cortical perimeter
around the corpus callosum. The limbic lobe is considered to
be a component of the more extensive limbic system.
The limbic system includes all the structures of the limbic
lobe as well as the amygdaloid body, septal area, and some
nuclei of the thalamus and hypothalamus. The two main
structures of the limbic system are the hippocampal formation (which includes the hippocampus proper, dentate gyrus,
and the subiculum) and the amygdala.
Question 3: The dentate gyrus gets its name from its toothlike configuration, created by numerous blood vessels that
pierce the ventricular surface of the hippocampus and then
the dentate gyrus, imparting a notched appearance.
Question 5: The entorhinal cortex. Widespread areas of the
association cortex relay input to the entorhinal cortex and it is
via the entorhinal cortex that these cortical association areas
have access to the hippocampus and play a role in memory
consolidation.
Question 7: The hypothalamus mediates autonomic nervous
system (visceral) responses that accompany the expression of
emotions.
Question 9: The perforant pathway from the entorhinal
cortex.
Question 1: The nuclei of this zone include the periventricular, suprachiasmatic, and arcuate nuclei. The periventricular
and arcuate nuclei control the functions of the anterior 
pituitary gland (adenohypophysis), which synthesizes and
releases various endocrine hormones into the bloodstream.
The suprachiasmatic nucleus functions in the control of circadian rhythms, and is referred to as the “master clock” of the
body.
Question 3: The lateral zone of the hypothalamus includes
the following nuclei: the lateral preoptic nucleus anteriorly,
the lateral tuberal nuclei in the tuberal region, and the lateral
hypothalamic nucleus, which extends throughout the anteroposterior extent of the lateral zone. The lateral zone receives
input from the limbic system and plays an important role in
the behavioral expression of emotions.
Question 5: The supraoptic region contains nuclei that
function in the control of circadian rhythms, temperature
regulation, and the control of water balance.
Question 7: The mammillary region includes the prominent
mammillary nuclei and the posterior hypothalamic nucleus.
The mammillary nuclei are associated with emotions,
whereas the posterior hypothalamic nucleus serves as a
“thermostat” and regulates body temperature.
Question 9: In addition to the neural input, the hypothalamus
also receives non-neural input from the vascular system.
Hypothalamic neurons serve as receptors that are sensitive to
rapid changes in the temperature, osmotic pressure, and hormone levels of the circulating blood. These receptors are
referred to as circumventricular organs (CVOs). They consist
of hypothalamic neurons that are embedded in the wall of the
third ventricle, and are sensitive to alterations in the chemical
composition of the cerebrospinal fluid. One of these structures is associated with the lamina terminalis, and is referred
to as the organum vasculosum of the lamina terminalis
(OVLT). The OVLT is a chemosensory structure that detects
and responds to peptides and macromolecules present in the
bloodstream. The other CVO is the subfornical organ located
inferior to the fornix, near the interventricular foramen. The
subfornical organ serves in the regulation of body fluids. The
fenestrated capillaries supplying these receptors do not have
a blood–brain barrier, thus they permit substances present in
the bloodstream to pass through and enter the extracellular
space surrounding the receptor cells.
Question 11: The fornix.
Question 13: The ascending reticular activating system
relays nociceptive input to the hypothalamus, which mediates the autonomic and reflex responses to nociception.
Question 15: The tuberohypophyseal tract carries fibers from
the arcuate and periventricular nuclei to the infundibular
stalk (posterior pituitary). The axon terminals of the tuberohypophyseal tract release “releasing hormones” or “releaseinhibiting hormones” in the hypophyseal portal system,
which carries them to the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland,
where they regulate the synthesis and release of anterior
pituitary hormones. The tuberohypophyseal tract and the
hypophyseal portal system serve as a connection between the
hypothalamus and anterior pituitary gland.
Question 17: There are two main problems that might cause
this condition: (i) a blockage of the superior hypophyseal
artery, thus depriving the anterior pituitary of nutrition; or
(ii) a lesion in the periventricular zone of the hypothalamus.
Question 1: The anterior nuclear group, a relay nucleus of the
Papez circuit of emotion, has extensive connections with the
limbic system. It receives afferent fibers relaying information
from the mammillary body and the hippocampal formation.
It in turn projects to the cingulate gyrus of the limbic association cortex. Due to its limbic connections, the anterior
nuclear group functions in the expression of emotions and,
due to its considerable connections with the hippocampal
formation, this nuclear group is also believed to be associated
with learning and memory processes.
The lateral dorsal nucleus (of the lateral group of thalamic
nuclei) is the caudal continuation of the anterior thalamic
nuclear group and may play a role in the expression of emotions. Like the anterior thalamic nuclear group, it receives
inputs from the mammillary body and in turn projects to the
cingulate and parahippocampal gyri of the limbic system.
The dorsomedial nucleus (of the medial group of thalamic
nuclei) also functions in the processing of information related
to emotion via its connections to the limbic system components such as the amygdala and the orbitofrontal cortex.
Question 3: The posterior portion of the ventral lateral (VLp)
nucleus receives prominent projections arising from the deep
cerebellar nuclei (mainly from the dentate nucleus) of the
opposite side, via the dentatothalamic tract. The VLp then
relays the information to the premotor and primary motor
cortex (Brodmann’s areas 6 and 4, respectively).
Question 5: The nonspecific nuclei of the thalamus, which
includes the intralaminar and reticular thalamic nuclei.
Question 1: Most of the cerebral cortex consists of association
cortex, which is classified into unimodal association cortex
and multimodal (heteromodal) association cortex. Unimodal
association areas are located next to, near, or around the primary sensory cortices that expand on the functions of the
respective primary areas. As an example, the primary visual
cortex (Brodmann’s area 17) projects to the visual association
cortex (Brodmann’s areas 18, 19, 20, 21, and 37), and only processes a single modality, in this case vision, and is thus
referred to as a unimodal association cortex. In contrast, the
multimodal association cortical areas receive inputs from
multiple sensory modalities; they then integrate the information and, via their higher order cognitive functions, formulate
a composite experience. The multimodal association cortex is
associated with imagination, judgement, decision making,
and making long-range plans.
Question 3: Studies of patients who had their corpus callosum sectioned showed the following. When patients were
asked to read words that were presented in their right visual
field, they were able see and to read the words. However,
when words were presented in their left visual field, they
could not read them, since they were not even aware that the
words were there. One explanation is as follows. Visual information in the right visual field is relayed to the left cerebral
hemisphere (via the visual pathway, which was not affected
when the corpus callosum was sectioned), which is the dominant hemisphere in the processing of language in most
individuals. Thus the patients were able to see and read the
words. In contrast, visual input from the left visual field is
relayed to the right cerebral hemisphere (again, via the visual
pathway, which was not affected when the corpus callosum
was sectioned), the nondominant hemisphere for language.
As a result of the bisection of the corpus callosum, the visual
input relayed to the right cerebral hemisphere has no way of
also reaching the left hemisphere containing the language
areas. Consequently, patients could not see or read the words
—as if they had a left homonymous hemianopia. These individuals are not blind. When they were asked to select with
their hand an object that corresponds to the object that was
presented in their left visual field, they selected the matching
object. This showed that the visual system is functioning
properly, and that it is the language function that is not.
Question 5: Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas are supplied by the
middle cerebral artery. This vessel has an extensive distribution and supplies parts of the frontal, parietal, temporal, and
occipital lobes. If only the cortical branches of the middle
cerebral artery supplying Broca’s area are occluded, the cerebral cortex of Broca’s area becomes infarcted, resulting in
Broca’s aphasia. If the proximal segment of the middle cerebral artery is occluded, the cerebral cortex of the insula and
subcortical white matter will also become infarcted, and a
severe form of Broca’s aphasia results, which is accompanied
by motor deficits in the contralateral lower face, tongue, and
upper limb.
If only the cortical branches of the middle cerebral artery
supplying Wernicke’s area are occluded, the cerebral cortex
of Wernicke’s area becomes infarcted, resulting in Wernicke’s
aphasia. If the subcortical white matter and geniculocalcarine
tract (optic radiations) are also involved, visual deficits will
also be present.