From time immemorial, the more philosophical among us have
pondered: “What is the essence of who I am? What is it that has made
me who I am?” Behavioral biology is the science of trying to figure
this out, with the guiding assumption that an understanding of who and why
we are cannot be achieved without considering our biology.
Now, a human asking these sorts of questions is more complicated, for a
myriad of reasons, than a wildebeest asking, “Why is it in my essence to
ovulate during one short period of time each year?” or a migratory bird
wondering, “Why is it that each year I wish to fly from Tierra del Fuego
to Alaska?” Tackling the biology of behavior is particularly daunting when
considering humans and their social behaviors.
These challenges are even more extreme when considering an aspect of our
behavior that is often the most interesting and important to study: What is
the behavioral biology of our abnormal human behaviors? Because of the
intrinsic intellectual challenge of a subject such as this, and because of its
implication, when we ask a question about the biology of abnormal human
behavior, we are often, de facto, asking: Whose fault is it that this has
occurred; who should be held accountable? Multiple murderer: damaged
frontal cortex or tainted soul? Spouse unable to get out of bed or go to work:
victim of the neurochemistry of depression or self-indulgent slacker? Child
failing at school: learning disabled or lazy?
This course is an introduction to the biology of human behavior, often of
abnormal human behavior, with an emphasis on the brain. The purpose of
the course is twofold: first, to teach the contemporary science of how our
brains regulate our thoughts, emotions, and feelings—how our brains make
us the individuals that we are—and second, to teach how our brains are
regulated—sculpted by evolution, constrained or freed by genes, shaped 
by early experience, modulated by hormones. In this framework, the view
is not of the brain as the be-all and end-all of what makes us individuals
but, rather, the brain as the final common pathway, the conduit by which
our individuality is shaped by biology that started anywhere from seconds to
millions of years ago.
After an introductory lecture presenting this framework, a quarter of the
course (Modules I and II) will be devoted to the functions of the nervous
system. These lectures are updated versions of those in the first edition of this
Teaching Company course and will start at the level of how a single neuron
functions, building upward until we examine how millions of neurons in a
particular region of the brain operate. The focus will be on the regions of the
brain most pertinent to emotion and behavior, rather than, say, to regulation
of kidney function.
The middle portion of the course (Modules III, IV, and V) will explore
how the brain and behavior are regulated. First, we will cover how the
brain regulates hormones and how hormones influence brain function and
behavior. Then, we will examine how both the brain and behavior evolved,
covering contemporary thinking about how natural selection has sculpted
and optimized behavior and how that optimization is mediated by brain
function. We will then focus on a bridge between evolution and the brain,
namely, what genes at the molecular level have to do with brain function and
how those genes have evolved.
Hormones, evolution, genes, and behavior, however, do not work in vacuo
but, instead, are extremely sensitive to environment. The next section
of the course (Module VI) examines ethology, which is the study of the
behavior of animals in their natural habitats (rather than, for example, in a
laboratory cage).
With these various approaches in hand, the final quarter of the course
(Module VII) will examine how each approach helps explain an actual set of
behaviors. Among a number of possible topics, we will focus on aggression,
both because of the extensive information available and the importance of
the subject. The facts of this subject are not intrinsically difficult, even for the nonscientist.
The implications, however, should seem far from simple. Yet this is a subject
that each of us must master, because all of us are, de facto, behavioral
biologists. We serve on juries, deciding whom to incarcerate, whom to put to
death. We vote for elected officials who have stances regarding gun control
and whether violence is inevitable, who determine whether certain types of
love between consenting adults should be consecrated by the government
imprimatur of marriage, who help decide whether a certain social problem
can be fixed by government expenditures or is biologically irrevocable. And
many of us will have to be behavioral biologists when confronting loved
ones whose behaviors have changed them to an unrecognizable extent and
deciding whether it is “them” or “their disease.”
The final lecture of this course will consider issues such as these: What
are the societal and philosophical consequences of knowledge about the
biology of our behaviors, the biology of what makes us the individuals that
we are?
What do we do about the fact that recently scientists have figured out
a way to change the brain chemistry of a male rodent and turn him
from being polygamous into monogamous? It’s not clear if this counts
as an intervention, or if this counts as a therapeutic sort of issue that we
should be trying in our human males.
The purpose of this course is to explain the biology of what makes us
who we are, the biology of our individual differences, the biology of
our behaviors. This introductory lecture presents the framework of
the course: that there is a neurobiology of who we are, that it is vital to learn
about it, and that it can best be understood with the interdisciplinary approach
of this course. Throughout the subsequent sections, the constant themes will
be the interactions of the various disciplines in their effects upon the brain
and how all this helps us to understand individual behavioral differences.
Biology must be considered as a possible factor in human behavior and
individuality. Examples of changes of behavior in two adult males illustrate
this factor. Chuck has always been an extrovert—charismatic, confident, and
flirtatious. Recently, though, he has been getting more introverted and more
withdrawn. Arthur, on the other hand, has always been obsessive, rigidly
ethical, and extremely reliable at work. But recently, he has started to tell
inappropriate sexual jokes, and he has even taken to stalking women. Could
such changes of behavior, often explained as a midlife crisis, actually be the
result of a mutation in a single gene? In these two cases, the answer is yes.
There is a biology to our sexual choices, the extent and type of our religiosity,
and everything else about us.
How do we tend to approach the challenge of understanding our behavior?
Typically, we think categorically, as with colors, coming up with labels
and explanations, but categorical thinking has its advantages and its
limits. (Figure 1a) Categorical thinking helps our memory, but categorical
boundaries distort our ability to see the differences and similarities between
two different facts. If you pay too much attention to the boundaries, you
have trouble seeing the big picture.
This course’s goal of noncategorical thinking about behavior is critical.
Little can be explained by merely thinking about genes alone, or brain 
chemicals, or hormones, or early experience, or any other single factor. Our
blueprint for the entire course is to start off looking at what a behavior is in
a particular category and a particular class, then to begin to ask biologically,
where did that behavior come from? (Figure 1b) We start off by studying
the brain and the nervous system. Beginning to work back in time, we then
try to understand further the things that modulate the nervous system, such
as environmental triggers, hormones, and perinatal and fetal development.
Then working further back, we look at the genetic attributes of the population
that an individual comes from. This approach pushes us all the way back to
examine what the pressures are of natural selection that sculpted that species.
Isn’t this approach obvious to everyone? Perhaps it is now, but in the nottoo-distant past, many prominent scientists in this field were unable to think
of the biology of our behavior in such a subtle way and, thus, often became
damaging ideologues.
What are the special challenges of thinking about the biology of behavior in
humans versus behavior in other animals? In some ways, human behave just
like any other animal, as with the synchronization of female reproductive
cycles. In other ways, humans have a physiology very similar to that of other
animals, but they utilize the physiology in unique ways. In still other ways,
human behavior is utterly unique in the animal world, as with aspects of
human sexual behavior for nonreproductive purposes.
The general strategy for this course is to see how behavior can be understood
in the context of everything from milliseconds of brain activity to millions
of years of evolution. We start with how the brain works and how the brain
produces behavior. We first study a single brain cell, a neuron, and then move
on to understand how one neuron communicates with another. We work our
way up to large networks of neurons, then to how the nervous system can
regulate how all of our cells work.
In the section on neurobiology, we will focus on two themes: first,
understanding why one individual’s nervous system works differently from
another’s and, second, understanding how this function can change over
time (plasticity). The subsequent lectures explore what it is that changes
how the nervous system works, whether the environment, hormones, early
experience, fetal life, genetics, or evolution. Finally, we approach a set of
human behaviors with this set of strategic ideas, focusing on a contentious
and important area of human behavior: aggression.
This module, which covers the next three lectures, begins with an
overview of how a single neuron works. This study will then be
expanded to see how two neurons communicate with each other
through the use of neurotransmitters—chemical messengers in the brain.
Finally, there is an overview of the critical topic of how such intercellular
communication can change over time, that is, how the brain, at the level of
pairs of neurons, learns and changes in response to the environment. 
We want to understand behavior; we want to understand human
behavior, where it’s coming from; we want to understand the
biological basis of it and where all of those influences, starting with
evolution a gazillion years ago are going to funnel eventually into the
nervous system.
This lecture covers the basic building blocks of neurobiology,
beginning with an overview of the neuron, its various parts, and how
each part functions and communicates with other neurons. The basic
constituent of the nervous system is the brain cell. (Figure 2a) The main
brain cell is the neuron. The other type of brain cell is the glial cell, which
we will discuss later in this lecture.
All neurons go from left to right, at least in diagrams. On the far left, we
have the dendrites, the ears of the neuron, which create chemical excitation
in the neuron. To the right of the dendrite is the cell body, the centerpiece
of the cell, where energy is produced. A wave of chemical excitation passes
from the dendritic end through the cell body down a long cable called the
axon. Axons are very long projections of neurons. The axon hillock is the
transitional point between the end of the cell body and the start of the axon.
At the end of the axon is the axon terminal that connects to the dendrites of
the next neuron.
Neuronal communication includes both resting potentials and action
potentials. To be prepared to communicate clearly, neurons must concentrate
on contrasts during resting potentials. (Figure 2b) In a state of equilibrium,
neurons create chemical contrasts. Neurons expend a great deal of energy
redistributing ions during the resting potentials.
When new information is transmitted by a single dendritic spine, channels
open and ions begin to move, causing a change in the electrical state of
the neuron. No single neuronal input triggers an action potential; there is 
not enough power for
the flow of electrical
information to continue.
Integration at the
neuronal level occurs
because of a process
called summation.
Temporal summation
occurs when the same
input is triggered over
and over so that it finally
moves down the axon.
Spatial summation
occurs when enough
different dendritic spines
are being stimulated at
once so that information
moves down the axon.
A neuron cell body is an
integrator of the inputs
of all the different
neurons around it.
When there is enough of
a wave of depolarization
to reach the axon
hillock, the axon hillock
integrates the various
inputs and decides
whether or not to act. When the axon hillock is triggered to act, neurons
are in action potential. Action potential does not decrement over space and
time; it regenerates and continues passing information through the axon
terminals to the next neurons. The axon hillock is a critical feature of the
nervous system.
11
Glial cells, which were once thought to be unimportant, can wrap around
the axon and form a myelin sheath. Myelin sheaths create an insulation
that increases the speed with which electrical waves move down the axon.
People are not born with myelin sheaths but develop them after birth. As
myelin sheaths form, new skills are possible, including comprehension and
production of language and regulation of behavior.
Neurons are a complex, integrated network with interesting implications.
The numbers of dendrites, neurons, and connectors vary from individual to
individual and can change at different points of the life cycle because of
environmental stimulation. Axon hillocks can also change over time and
under different circumstances. These neurological differences and changes
affect individuality. 
We are back and ready to resume our quest to understand the nervous
system and how it produces behavior, and how everything on earth that
came before that nervous system can regulate its function.
This lecture moves from how the brain works on the level of a single
neuron to how information moves across the synapse from one neuron
to the next. Exploring how electrical signals are changed to chemical
messages in the brain provides a critical foundation for understanding how
the brain works, the effects of certain drugs on the brain, and the neurological
origins of individuality.
In order for information to move from one neuron to the next, information
must cross the synapse. (Figure 3a) An electrical signal cannot pass through
the synapse; thus, a neuron must translate its excitation into a different
“language.” The release of neurotransmitters translates an electrical signal to
a chemical signal. Neurotransmitters are packaged in vesicles attached to the
membrane wall. During action potential, vesicles release neurotransmitters
into the synapse. The neurotransmitters bind to their receptors.
The shape of the neurotransmitter and its receptor must be complementary—
the classic notion of key and lock. The binding of the neurotransmitter to its
receptor changes the excitability of the next neuron in line. Multiple receptor
types exist for the same neurotransmitter.
Upon deactivation, neurotransmitters either are recycled back into the next
vesicle being formed or they float into the synapse, where they are eventually
broken down by enzymes.
There are multiple types of neurotransmitters and not all are excitatory.
How many types of neurotransmitters exist? A limited number, but we have
multiple uses of the same messenger. Inhibitory transmitters cause a decrease
in excitability of the postsynaptic neuron. Not all neurotransmitters are
equal; there are subtle graduations of the effects among both the excitatory
and inhibitory transmitters.
The construction of neurotransmitters is less intimidating than you might
think. They are constructed from cheap and plentiful precursors—simple
amino acids that you get in your diet in huge amounts. A small number of
biosynthetic steps are required in their construction; thus, they are produced
quickly. Multiple messengers can be squeezed out of a single synthetic
pathway. Neurotransmitters are also easily recycled.
What criteria are used to determine what constitutes a neurotransmitter?
(Figure 3b) It is located in the axon terminal. It is released during the
action potential. It floats across the synapse and binds with receptors on the
postsynaptic neuron. Any interference with the neurotransmitter will alter
the neurochemical events in a predictable manner.
Changes in the amount of neurotransmitter released can change the strength
of signaling across a synapse. Changes in the number and sensitivity of
receptors can change the strength of signaling across a synapse.
Neuropharmacology manipulates the neurochemistry of the synapse to
better understand the workings of the neurotransmission process. Research
with drugs that alter brain function is an important tool for studying normal
and diseased states. Some drugs so closely resemble a naturally occurring
neurotransmitter that the receptors are fooled by it. An ingested drug can get
into the bloodstream, enter the brain, get into a synapse, and very effectively
bind to the receptor because that drug has a chemical structure almost
identical to that of an actual neurotransmitter. For example, hallucinogens,
such as LSD, mescaline, and psilocybin, are able to artificially stimulate the
serotonin receptor.
Other drugs block the access of a neurotransmitter to its receptor, halting
communication across the synapse. Curare can block the acetylcholine
receptor in the diaphragm, causing breathing to cease. Antipsychotic drugs
can block the dopamine receptor, lessening symptoms of schizophrenia.
Some drugs cause the inappropriate release of neurotransmitters.
Amphetamines and cocaine trigger the premature release of dopamine
transmitters. Because the release of dopamine makes a person feel pleasure
in at least one part of the brain, artificially releasing more of it makes such
drugs as cocaine highly addictive. Drugs that release dopamine can trigger
schizophrenic behavior, while drugs that block dopamine are used to halt
schizophrenic behavior.
Drugs can also alter the breakdown and recycling of neurotransmitters
or can be used to destroy particular neurotransmitters completely. 
The neurotransmitter norepinephrine can be destroyed to lower blood
pressure. Antidepressants, including Prozac, cause amplification in the
neurotransmitter’s signal by blocking its degradation.
Another manipulation is to increase the amount of precursors for certain
neurotransmitters, for example, increasing the L-DOPA level for patients
with Parkinson’s disease. Manipulation of chemicals always has the risk of
side effects, primarily because each neurotransmitter has multiple jobs in
different parts of the brain.
An example of how neurochemistry influences individuality can be seen
in the neurotransmitter endogenous benzodiazepine, which is a compound
similar to the drugs Valium and Librium. Endogenous benzodiazepine
receptors influence anxiety levels. How much benzodiazepine an individual
makes, releases, and breaks down will determine his or her anxiety level.
Tranquilizers, such as Valium and Librium, are used to decrease a person’s
anxiety level. 
Now our theme has been at the end of each lecture, twofold: one is looking
at plasticity, how things change over time, individual differences, and
when it comes to plasticity in the synapse, how it functions differently
in response to experience. That’s such an important topic that gets an
entire lecture today.
Changing the strength of synaptic communication is the basis for
learning. The dominant paradigm is that learning is the process of
making certain pathways work more readily than they did before.
In earlier times, it was believed that whenever something new was learned,
a new neuron or a new synapse was formed; this may actually be true. The
cortex and hippocampus are the main regions of the brain responsible for
learning and memory. Problems in the
hippocampus may result in such diseases
as Alzheimer’s disease. The famous case of
H.M., who had his hippocampus removed,
shows the importance of the hippocampus
to memory.
Long-term potentiation (LTP), a synaptic
model for learning, is the process of
stimulating a dendritic spine in a dense
cluster of rapid action potentials, resulting
in that synapse becoming hyperresponsive
or potentiated. (Figure 4a) After potentiation
has occurred, the pathway is stronger. Potentiation increases the likelihood
that a single neuron can cause an action potential. These changes are
long lasting.
How does the initial phase of LTP work? LTP is the result of glutamate being
released into synapses throughout the hippocampus. Glutamate is a simple
neurotransmitter made from an amino acid. Glutamate is the most excitatory
neuron with two receptor systems, each of which is differentially excitable.
The workings of the two receptors explain the “Ah ha!” of learning. With
repeated stimulation, enough glutamate is dumped into the synapses to open
the second receptor, which allows a wave of excitatory calcium to pour in,
causing great potentiation.
How does LTP become long term? (Figure 4b) As LTP occurs, calcium
enters the neuron. Calcium triggers an increase in the number of glutamate
receptors in the relevant dendritic spine. Calcium causes the receptors
to stay open and activated longer once they are excited. Calcium changes
how readily the electrical wave spreads once there is some excitation. Once
calcium rushes in, it causes the synthesis of a neurotransmitter that floats
back to the presynaptic neuron. These retrograde neurotransmitters increase
the amount of glutamate being synthesized by the presynaptic neuron.
Some of these new transmitters are made from gases and, therefore, do not
need vesicles.
The vulnerability of glutamatergic pathways to neurological insults is
relevant to a number of neurological diseases and disorders. If glutamate
levels get too high (a condition called excitotoxicity), the postsynaptic neuron
can be excited to death. This condition can occur in stroke, seizure, and
cardiac arrest. Monosodium glutamate (MSG) and other dietary constituents
that resemble glutamate may be worth worrying about.
How do you forget anything? This is an important topic in the field of
neurobiology, and it is still under study. In some manner, however, forgetting
is thought to be a reversal of all the steps that we have just covered regarding
LTP. Several factors influence how readily LTP occurs. Some factors are
known to enhance LTP. Abundant energy—lots of glucose in your blood that
translates into neurons with more energy—facilitates LTP. Short-term stress
(stimulation) causes stress hormones to be released on a short-term basis,
and these hormones enhance memory. Some factors are known to disrupt
LTP. Energy depletion makes LTP less likely to occur. When you run out of
energy, the whole transport of neurotransmitters is disrupted. Chronic stress,
unlike short-term stress, disturbs many types of memory consolidation and
memory retrieval. Alcohol in sufficient amounts dramatically disrupts LTP.
Individual differences in the area of LTP can manifest themselves in a number
of ways. The amount and functions of neurotransmitters, receptors, and so on
can vary greatly from person to person. An experiment at Princeton provides
an interesting view on this subject. Scientists at Princeton developed Doogie
mice, genetically engineered rodents that had better than average LTP and
demonstrated better than average learning. Then, the scientists developed
their less heralded cousins, mice with an impaired capacity for LTP and
learning. They then raised the impaired mice in an extremely stimulating
environment, which overcame their deficit. This experiment shows that even
something as seemingly deterministic as a major genetic defect can still be
subject to important environmental modulation. 
Module Scope:
This portion of the course expands the scale beyond that of cellular
neurobiology to look at the functioning of networks of neurons.
Lecture 5 is an introduction to the computational potential of neuronal
networks. Lecture 6 is an examination of how millions of neurons—entire
subregions of the brain—function. That lecture will specifically focus on the
part of the brain called the limbic system, which is vitally concerned with
emotion. Finally, Lecture 7 examines how the limbic system regulates the
function of the body by way of the autonomic nervous system. 
We are now accomplishing this ever-expanding view of how the nervous
system works.
The brain consists of networks of neurons. It has far more than patterns
of single neurons in line, instead, neurons send axons to many other
neurons, sending
branches off, even back
to themselves, forming
networks. Neurons
sharpen the detection
of signals by inhibiting
themselves and other
neurons. Neurons
communicate with
themselves. (Figure 5a)
The ability of neurons to
have projections coming
off the axon and sending
projections back onto
themselves allows them
to inhibit themselves and
sharpen their signals over
time. This communication
creates individual action
potentials, followed
by resting potentials.
Recurrent collateral
projections are seen in
many neurons. Through
lateral inhibition, neurons
sharpen their signals over
space. (Figure 5b) The
excitation of one neuron leads to the delayed inhibition of other neurons. This
lateral inhibition helps to enhance the precise localization of information.
The work of Hubel and Wiesel helped to explain the wiring of neural
networks. (Figures 5c, 5d, and 5e) By studying how each section of the
cortex processed visual information, they were able to show that each layer
of the cortex became increasingly sophisticated. Point-for-point mapping at
the first layer indicated that these neurons “know” about dots of light. The
neurons in the second layer of the cortex “know” about straight lines of light.
The neurons in the third layer of the cortex “know” about moving lines,
while the neurons in the fourth layer “know” about angles.
Following this logic, it was believed that one could continue through the
layers and find more super-specialized neurons that recognize more specific
information. This finding was not possible because there could not possibly
be enough neurons for each to contain a single piece of information. It is not
single neurons that contain information but patterns of neuronal excitation.
A neural network is a series of neurons that interact among themselves and
with neurons from other networks. Neurons from different networks can
overlap and be used
in different settings.
Memory retrieval is the
result of tapping into
many networks and
integrating all those
inputs. Mild neuron
loss, including that
associated with earlystage dementia and
Alzheimer’s disease,
does not destroy
memories as much as
it makes it harder to
retrieve memory.
Neural networks
also influence how
the human body
feels and responds to
pain. (Figure 5f) In
instances of sharp pain,
the neurons directly
affected “turn on” pain,
and through inhibition,
the pain is “turned off.”
In instances of dull
pain, those neurons
directly affected
“turn on” pain; however, the lack of self-inhibition causes the throbbing
to continue. It is the individual differences that exist in the overlapping
projections of networks that cause people to know different information and
to make different connections with that information. That is what creativity
is about. On a simplistic level, creative people have broader networks than
most other people, resulting in their ability to make unique associations.
Increasing the scale beyond that of single neural networks, this lecture
examines the limbic system—the part of the brain most centrally
involved in emotion and in generation of emotionally related behavior.
The brain is not one homogenous mass of undifferentiated neurons.
Instead, there is structure and organization to it. Clusters of neuronal
cell bodies, called gray matter, are the nuclei of cell bodies. Cables
of axons are projections from those cell bodies. They are called white matter
because they are wrapped in white myelin sheaths. Now, we expand one
step further to the neuroanatomy
of the brain. First, we see the
broad features of the mammalian
brain. (Figure 6a) Heading down
from the brain are the spinal
cord, sensory afferents, and
motor efferents, all of which
carry sensory information and
messages to all parts of the
body. At the back of the brain
are the hindbrain and brainstem,
which control such activities
as breathing and the beating of
the heart. Sitting on top of the
hindbrain and brainstem is the
limbic system, which deals with
regulation of emotions. Higher up
is the cortex, involved in memory,
learning, judgment, decision
making, conscious commands to
muscles, and complex processing
of sensory information. 
Species differences
in neuroanatomical
organization must
be noted. The
limbic system is a
mammalian specialty;
only mammals have
complex emotions.
The cortex, which
is involved in social
intelligence, is a
primate specialty.
What is the limbic
system? (Figure 6b)
Historically, people
used to think that the
limbic system was the
rhinencephalon, or
“nose-brain,” because
it was studied first
in laboratory rats,
for which olfaction
and emotion are
utterly intertwined.
The limbic system
comprises many
different subareas.
These subareas send
projections to one
another and to other parts of the brain, particularly to the hypothalamus. All
of the brain nuclei in the limbic system want to influence the hypothalamus.
Conversely, these nuclei want to inhibit other limbic sites from influencing
the hypothalamus. The hypothalamus controls all manner of autonomic
(automatic) functions in your body. Future lectures will address the
hypothalamus in more detail.
The best way to determine which limbic structure influences the hypothalamus
most readily is to count synapse numbers. The fewer synapses it takes to
get from one limbic structure to the hypothalamus, the more influential that
structure is over the hypothalamus.
Components of the limbic system include major structures, as well as major
connections within the system. (Figures 6c and 6d) Major structures within
the limbic system include the amygdala, the hippocampus, the septum, the
cingulate cortex and gyrus, the hypothalamus, the mammillary bodies, the
thalamic nuclei, and the frontal cortex. Major connections within the limbic
system include the amygdalofugal pathway (amygdala to hippocampus);
the fimbria/fornix (hippocampus to septum); the striae terminalis (amygdala
to hypothalamus); the medial forebrain bundle (the highway between the
mammillary bodies and the septum, passing through the hypothalamus); and
the mammillothalamic tract (mammillaries to thalamus).
How do we know what the limbic system does? Scientists come to understand
what the limbic system does in the same ways that they discover how any
brain region works. One way is to experimentally damage the part of the brain
to be studied in research animals. Accidental wounds to the human brain can 
provide similar information. Other strategies are to stimulate certain parts
of the brain or to record the electrical activity of certain clusters of neurons.
A relatively new method is brain imaging. A more classical approach is
neuroanatomy: determining which region talks to which. Some pitfalls of
these approaches include redundancy, compensation, and mistaking the
function of a nucleus for the function of the fibers passing through it.
Studying limbic function poses special challenges because this area of the
brain deals with complex, subtle, interactive emotions; therefore, many
factors must be kept in mind. What sort of sensory information is relevant
in a particular species? For example, sexual arousal in one species can be
about smell and in another, about sight. What does a behavior look like in a
particular species? For example, maternal behavior in a rat is very different
from that in a monkey. Who is the individual under study? Do dominant and
subordinate animals express emotions in the same way?
Simplified explanations of some functions for limbic structures are helpful
to further understand the brain and behavior. The amygdala and septum
have roles in aggression. The hippocampus is important in certain types
of learning, memory, and stress-responsiveness. Mammillary bodies are
associated with maternal behavior. The frontal cortex controls inhibition of
socially inappropriate behaviors and inhibition of perseverative cognitions.
The medial preoptic region of the hypothalamus is associated with sexual
behavior. The lateral and ventromedial hypothalamus affect hunger and
satiation. The suprachiasmatic nucleus of the hypothalamus is involved in
circadian rhythmicity. 
Although the heart is able to beat on its own, the brain tells it whether
to speed up or slow down.
Let’s start with the basics of the Autonomic Nervous System (ANS).
The voluntary nervous system controls the rapid regulation of
skeletal muscles. In contrast, the ANS regulates involuntary function
throughout the body. The
ANS has two components.
The sympathetic nervous
system (SNS), which
releases epinephrine and
norepinephrine (adrenalin
and noradrenalin), is used
for emergencies. The
parasympathetic nervous
system (PNS) releases
acetylcholine, which triggers
a calm, vegetative state.
The SNS and PNS work in
choreographed opposition in
all parts of the body. (Figure
7a) Although the heart is able
to beat on its own, the brain
tells it whether to speed up or
slow down. The SNS causes
the heart to beat faster and
blood pressure to increase,
all as a strategy to deliver
energy to exercising muscle.
The PNS does the opposite,
slowing down the heart. SNS
31
and PNS also interact during digestion. Under normal circumstances, the
PNS stimulates the digestive tract. During an emergency, the SNS has the
opposite effects. It shuts down digestion and blood flow to the gastrointestinal
tract to ensure that energy is not wasted there.
The SNS and PNS work in a more coordinated fashion when a male
becomes aroused. In order for the penis of a male to become erect, the PNS
must be activated and, thus, requires that he be in a calm state. The SNS,
however, slowly takes over, and when the PNS is turned off, ejaculation
occurs. Syndromes of erectile dysfunction include stress-induced erectile
dysfunction, during which stress prevents a man from attaining a state of
calm and, thus, an erection, and premature ejaculation, during which the
transition from PNS to SNS occurs more quickly than desired. Both are
disorders of the choreography between the PNS and SNS.
The ANS is activated and regulated differently in three layers of the brain.
(Figure 7b) The first regulation of the ANS is directly influenced by the
hypothalamus. For example, if a person is injured and his or her blood pressure
is dropping, a blood pressure sensor sends a message up the spinal cord to
the hypothalamus, which stimulates the SNS, increasing blood pressure and 
heart rate. In the second layer, the ANS is regulated by the limbic system.
For example, the scent or the sight of a threatening rival is detected, causing
an emotional response and sending a message to the hypothalamus, which in
turn, activates the ANS.
In the third layer, we have cortical regulation of the ANS in a way that is
fairly unique to primates. Cortical projections are sent to the limbic system,
including the hypothalamus, to activate the ANS. Thought and memory
serve as stimulants of the ANS. This method of activation gives us insight
into the cause of clinical depression. On a certain level, depression can be
thought of as the cortex sending abstractly depressive thoughts into limbic
and hypothalamic regions, resulting in the affect of depression (as well as
overactivity of the stress response). A clinically depressed person feels grief,
exhaustion, and an absence of pleasure, called anhedonia.
Plasticity in ANS function over time manifests itself in three ways.
Habituation is the process whereby the same stimulus will not have the same
effect on the ANS. Sensitization is the process whereby a stimulus that once
did not have an effect on the ANS now does. Biofeedback is a conscious tool
for controlling the unconscious workings of the ANS; for example, thinking
relaxing thoughts can reduce the SNS response. Individual differences in
ANS function explain why some of us are more vulnerable to depression or
anxiety disorders than others.
The lectures on the brain ended with an overview of how the brain (via
the limbic system) regulates the body by way of the ANS. Starting
with Lecture 8, this module first examines how the limbic system
also regulates the body through the release of hormones. Following that is
a review of the different types of hormones and what sort of effects they
have. Lecture 9 considers the converse of the brain’s regulation of hormones,
namely, the hormones’ regulation of the brain. How can hormones change
the function and even the very structure of the brain? The main point of these
lectures is to refute the notion that hormones “cause” behaviors to occur
(for example, the notion that testosterone “causes” aggression) and, instead,
to explain how hormones interact with the nervous system to change the
likelihood of behaviors occurring in certain environments.
I’ve changed my shirt since the last lecture and thus feel wildly
invigorated, and that’s a great thing because we are talking
hormones today.
What is the difference between a neurotransmitter and a hormone?
Neurotransmitters travel across synapses and influence the next
neuron in line, while hormones travel in the bloodstream. There
are three other major differences between neurons and hormones. Hormones
work more slowly than neurotransmitters. Neurons communicate only with
neurons; hormones influence
every cell in the body and can
be secreted from various parts
of the body. Hormones have a
broader effect on cells. The brain
plays a critical role in regulating
the endocrine systems.
The hypothalamus is the center
of the endocrine world, and
the limbic system tries to tell
the hypothalamus what to do.
(Figure 8a) The earlier view
was that peripheral glands were
autonomous and self-regulating.
This notion then gave way to the
equally incorrect idea that the
pituitary was the “master gland.”
It is understood now that the
brain is an endocrine gland and
that the hypothalamus secretes
an array of hormones, which in
turn, regulate the pituitary gland.
35
The anterior pituitary is a hormonal system that is entirely under the control
of the brain. The hypothalamus releases hormones to stimulate or inhibit
the pituitary gland cells. The anterior pituitary, in turn, regulates hormonal
release from peripheral glands. The posterior pituitary is another hormonal
system that is entirely under the control of the brain. The posterior pituitary
can be considered an outpost of the brain. The posterior pituitary releases
oxytocin and vasopressin, hormones that play roles in birth and lactation.
The body also has hormonal systems that are under partial control by the
brain. One example is the pancreas, which produces a number of hormones,
the most recognized of which is insulin. Insulin secretion is triggered by
blood glucose, and it is also triggered through the PNS by the expectation
of food. Hormonal systems in the body that The body also has hormonal
systems that are independent
of the brain. In such cases,
hormones are derived from all
sorts of unlikely sources, such
as the heart and the immune
system. (Figure 8b) When the
heart senses high blood pressure,
it releases a hormone, ANF, to
the kidneys to tell them to make
more urine, thereby reducing the
amount of fluid in circulation;
as a result, blood volume is
reduced and blood pressure is
lowered. The immune system
also has messengers that act
as hormones. One of them,
Interleukin 1, triggers white
blood cells to proliferate and
mount an immune defense
against a pathogen that the
system has detected. Interleukin
1 can also affect brain function,
bringing about fatigue or fever
and making one’s body ache by sensitizing pain pathways, and it can trigger
a stress response. All these events are ways to make a person decrease
activity during illness.
There are two broad classes of hormones. Steroid hormones include
estrogens, androgens, progestins, glucocorticoids, and mineralocorticoids.
The other class of hormones is made from amino acids; that is, they are
protein based. They include insulin, follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), and
growth hormone. For both classes, we see
the themes of cheap and plentiful starting
material, short synthetic pathways, and
multiple messengers derived from the same
precursors. But cheap messengers require
very fancy and expensive receptors to tell
apart these structurally similar hormones.
Hormone receptors are as critical to the
endocrine system as the hormones they
receive. Hormones bind to receptors and,
thereby, activate events in cells. Amino
acid-derived hormones tend to influence the activity of proteins that already
exist in the cell (for example, epinephrine mobilizing energy from storage
sites during an emergency). Steroid hormones tend to alter the synthesis of
new proteins. The amount of a hormone in the bloodstream is important, but
so are the amount and function and possible mutation of hormone receptors.
A great deal of crosstalk exists between different endocrine systems.
An example of such crosstalk is seen in the effects of stress on female
reproduction. (Figure 8c) The ovarian axis illustrates the pathway. The
hypothalamus releases the luteinizing hormone releasing hormone (LHRH).
The LHRH causes the anterior pituitary to release the luteinizing hormone.
The ovaries are then triggered to release estrogen, causing the uterine
wall to mature. If you add any major form of stress, such as starvation or
psychological trauma, stress hormones will influence every step in that
pathway. Stress and its effects on hormone release from fat cells show that
starvation is an antireproductive form of stress. Likewise, excessive amounts
Hormone receptors
are as critical to the
endocrine system as the
hormones they receive.
Hormones bind to
receptors and, thereby,
activate events in cells.
37
of exercise can cause the release of beta-endorphins, which, along with other
stress hormones, can also have antireproductive effects. Stress-induced
release of prolactin disrupts uterine maturation.
What we do in this lecture is one of the things that science often does,
which is to complete a loop, show a big, old regulatory loop. Now
looking at not how the brain regulates hormones, but how hormones in
the circulation get back into the brain and regulate brain function.
Hormones have effects on cells, including cells in the brain. Both
neurons and glial cells have hormone receptors. Hormones can
alter protein function and synthesis in the brain, just as they do
throughout the rest of the body. Hormones can alter neurotransmitter actions
in the brain. (Figure 9a) Dopamine is a neurotransmitter of pleasure in the
brain. Steroid hormones called glucocorticoids are released during stress,
and these hormones have an effect on dopamine release. During short-term
stress (stimulation), a transient rise in glucocorticoid levels occurs, resulting
in increased synaptic release of dopamine. This can produce pleasurable
effects. LTP is enhanced as well. During
long-term stress, however, a chronic rise
in glucocorticoid levels occurs; thus, the
dopamine neurons are depleted, leading to
anhedonia, or the inability to feel pleasure.
Hormones can also alter the plasticity of
synapses. Glucocorticoid levels affect the
hippocampus and the amygdala differently.
A transient rise in glucocorticoid levels
in the hippocampus brought on by shortterm stress enhances LTP, while sustained glucocorticoid exposure in the
hippocampus can disrupt LTP. On the other hand, chronic stress enhances
LTP in the amygdala, thereby enhancing the ability of the amygdala to “file
away” memories of trauma. This factor might explain free-floating anxiety, in
which the hippocampus does not recall an explicit traumatic memory, but the
amygdala recognizes the source of the trauma and activates the sympathetic 
nervous system. Estrogen is another hormone that enhances LTP in
the hippocampus.
Hormones can change the structure of neural networks, causing neurons to
grow more elaborate dendritic branches or to shrivel up. Chronic stress and
the resulting chronic glucocorticoid exposure cause atrophy of hippocampal
neurons, thus inhibiting learning. Chronic stress and the resulting chronic
glucocorticoid exposure cause expansion of dendritic branches in the
amygdala, thus increasing anxiety. Higher estrogen levels cause the growth
of new dendritic branches in hippocampal neurons, thus enhancing learning
and memory.
Hormones can also affect the birth and death of neurons. The discovery of
adult neurogenesis is an exciting new finding in neurobiology. Estrogen
enhances the birth of new neurons in the adult brain, while glucocorticoids
inhibit such neurogenesis. Estrogen makes neurons more likely to survive
a neurological insult, while glucocorticoids do the opposite in response to
such an insult.
Hormones can influence how the brain regulates the body and behavior. For
example, it used to be thought that glucose levels in the bloodstream alone
controlled our appetites. Now it is known that an array of hormones released
by the gastrointestinal tract, fat cells, liver, and pancreas regulate appetite.
A theme that runs through behavioral neuroendocrinology is that hormones
may “cause” some behaviors, such as aggression, to occur. Instead, however,
hormones alter a preexisting tendency for the behavior to occur in the
context of interaction with the environment. This notion will be studied more
in depth in the lectures on aggression.
This module is the first of a series that expands the focus of the course,
examining how the brain is shaped and regulated. It considers the
evolution of the brain and behavior. First, we review the mechanisms
of evolution, then we look at how those mechanisms might be relevant
to the evolution of behavior. In Lecture 11, we then consider a variety of
initially puzzling examples of social behavior in the light of evolutionary
principles. Finally, in Lecture 12, we review the evolution of competition
and how the brain functions under different settings of competition. 
We all understand the evolutionary biology of how, for example, the
giraffe evolved its long neck as an adaptive trait. This lecture introduces
the idea that behavior and the brain that produces behavior have also
evolved, sculpted toward adaptive features by natural selection. Then,
the lecture provides an overview of the various ways in which species
can maximize the number of copies of their genes passed on to the next
generation through behavioral means.
The evolutionary biology taught in high school was built around certain
key points that help to explain such phenomena as how giraffes
evolved long necks. The first key point is the inheritance of traits
across generations; that is, traits can be passed on from one generation to the
next. The second key point is the variability in those heritable traits among
individuals. In modern genetic molecular terms, mutations in genes can be
passed from one generation to the next. The third key point is known as
differential fitness; that is, some versions of those genetic variants are more
adaptive, more fit, than others. (Figure 10a) Organisms with maladaptive
mutations do not reproduce; they do not survive, and therefore, they do
not pass on copies of their genes. Organisms having beneficial mutations,
however, do reproduce; thus, the new version of a trait becomes more
plentiful. Intrinsic to this key point is the debunking of a great urban legend
of evolution, which is survival of the fittest. Instead, the key is reproduction
of the fittest.
How did behavior evolve? The notion exists that behavior is sculpted by
evolution, by the same forces of nature that influenced the length of our necks
and the functioning of our hearts and kidneys. That notion leads, however,
to the inflammatory issue of heritability of behavior: the issue of whether a
certain behavior has a genetic component.
Building block #1 in considering the evolution of behavior is individual
selection. The old notion of group selection, that is, the idea that animals
behave “for the good of the species” and that behaviors are driven by ways
to increase the likelihood of the species surviving and multiplying, has been
proven wildly incorrect.
Instead, by the early 1960s, the concept of individual selection was accepted.
This idea proposed that evolution is not about animals behaving for the good
of the species but, rather, behaving to optimize the number of copies of their
own genes to pass on to the next generation. This idea brought about the
oversimplified and somewhat erroneous notion of the selfish gene: the idea
that a gene’s purpose is to maximize one’s own ability to reproduce and to
pass on copies of one’s own genes. Another way to illustrate this idea is a
quote from an early evolutionist, Samuel Butler: “A chicken is just an egg’s
way of making another egg.” A rather grim example of the logic of individual
selection is competitive infanticide, as seen in a number of species, even
those as endangered as the gorilla.
Building block #2 in considering the evolution of behavior is kin selection
(inclusive fitness). What does it mean to be related to someone? It means
you share genes with that individual. Kin selection is a way to help your
relatives reproduce as much as they can—passing on copies of your genes
by helping relatives. Degrees of relatedness on a genetic level come into
play here because we are “more related” to some individuals than others.
For example, full siblings are closer genetically than half siblings; a parent
is closer genetically to a child than is a grandparent. In short, the more steps
away relatives are from one another, the fewer genes they share in common.
One of the implications of kin selection is an obsession with kinship. For
the most part, data support the logic that we
are cooperative with relatives as a function of
how related they are to us; hence the quote
of evolutionary geneticist J. B. S. Haldane:
“I will lay down my life for two brothers or
eight cousins.”
Some examples of kin selection in the
animal world include adelphic polyandry,
food sharing in inbred species, and parentoffspring conflict. Polyandry, in which a
single female mates with more than one male, occurs fairly rarely in the
animal kingdom and among humans. However, when it does occur, it is
often adelphic polyandry, in which the males are brothers. Many studies
show that the degree of relatedness is an accurate predictor of how much
one animal shares food with another. Parent-offspring conflict stems from
the idea that whereas a parent wants to balance the survival of current
offspring with that of future offspring, those current offspring want more
care than the parent cares to offer. For example, conflict may occur between
a mother baboon who wishes to wean her year-old offspring so that she can
ovulate and possibly produce another, while that young baboon wants to
continue nursing.
Building block #3 in considering the evolution of behavior is reciprocal
altruism. This notion is based on the concept that many hands make the task
light. Such cooperation ensures the distribution of risk- and food-sharing
among hunters. Reciprocity is very common in all sorts of social species,
even among nonrelatives. However, species that exhibit such patterns of
cooperation must possess certain characteristics. Reciprocity will work only
in a species with stable social groups. The species involved must live long
How the nervous
system regulates the
body and how the
body in turn, by way of
hormones can regulate
the nervous system.
45
enough to benefit from the cooperation. The members of the species must
have enough social intelligence to recognize other members of their species.
In games of reciprocal altruism, which we will discuss in Lecture 12,
individuals will try to cheat whenever they can; thus, another requirement is
vigilance against cheaters. Potential examples of reciprocal altruism include
blood-sharing among vampire bats and coalitions among male baboons.
How can we successfully predict the social structure of an entire
species (tournament versus pair-bonding) based on just one fact?
Imprinted genes and intersexual competition also play roles in
evolutionary biology. (Figure 11b) Mendel theorized that a gene is a gene,
regardless of which parent you inherited it from. Imprinted genes—genes
that produce different outcomes in offspring depending on which parent
they come from—have been discovered to be an exception to the laws of
Mendelian heredity. For example, during fetal life, some male-derived genes
push for more fetal growth, while female-derived genes favor the opposite.
The logic of imprinted genesis is that in polygamous species, males and
females have different investments
in any given pregnancy. The male
would like the female to expend all her
energy raising his offspring, even at
the expense of her ability to reproduce
again. The female, however, wishes
to balance her investment in her
current offspring with her investment
in her future reproductive potential.
The effects of imprinted genes in the
brain on behavior after birth provide
a marked contrast, with male-derived
genes favoring more feeding and growth and female-derived genes the
opposite, trying to slow the growth down. Generally, polygamous species
have large numbers of imprinted genes, whereas monogamous species have
virtually none. Humans are neither a classic pair-bonding species nor a
classic tournament species; we are somewhere in between. Therefore, we
have some imprinted genes.
Fruit flies and sperm competition also illustrate this intersexual competition.
Numerous male fruit flies mate with the female; thus, sperm from many
different males is inside the female fruit fly’s body. The male sperm
release toxins in an effort to kill its competitors’ sperm. These toxins are
damaging to the female fruit fly. However, female fruit flies’ bodies have
evolved so that they now produce detoxifying defenses. Kin-based defense
systems also illustrate the notion of kin selection. When female vervet
monkey A attacks female vervet monkey B for “no reason,” the underlying
cause for the attack can actually be that the child of monkey B had attacked
the child of monkey A. Patterns of aggression that closely follow the lines of
kin selection are another way to ensure that the maximum number of copies
of one’s genes is passed on to the next generation.
Last lecture was incredibly depressing. All I did was tell you that the
modern viewpoint of evolutionary biology just selects for competition
and National Enquirer headlines; that fruit fly poisons lover and nature
is just bloody and tooth and claw. Where we pick up with today is the
fact that that’s absolutely not the case.
One of the three building blocks of evolutionary biology is reciprocal
altruism or cooperation, which was covered in Lecture 10.
Cooperation is evolutionarily desirable, improving conditions in
many settings. The bigger advantage is gained, however, when the other
individual cooperates while you cheat. However, if you both cheat, the
outcome can be really bad. Thus, the question
arises: When do you cooperate and when do you
cheat? This question is at the heart of a relatively
new field called game theory, which originated
in the area of economics.
Game theory applications to evolutionary
biology are manifested in a game called the
Prisoner’s Dilemma. (Figure 12a) Its basic
design is one of cooperation or defection:
Successfully cheating is more rewarding
than mutually cooperating, which is more
rewarding than no one cooperating, which is
more rewarding than cooperating with a cheater.
Economist Robert Axelrod’s famous roundrobin Prisoner’s Dilemma tournament led to the emergence of the tit-for-tat
strategy: losing the battles but winning the war by being cooperative, clear,
retributive, and forgiving. The vulnerability of the tit-for-tat strategy lies in
signal errors, in other words, if communication between two sides is unclear.
Forgiving tit-for-tat is a derived strategy that comes about when a mistake
in communication is introduced into the system. After the wrong signal
is given, a few rounds of cheating ensue, then one player “forgives,” and
cooperation is reestablished.
Establishing cooperation in such games as the Prisoner’s Dilemma can prove
challenging. The problem exists of the disadvantage for the first player to
make an altruistic gesture; that player will always be one step behind. One
solution is kin selection in isolated, inbred populations. (Figure 12b) A small
group that has become separated from a greater group tends to inbreed, with
members becoming more related to each other; in this way, cooperation
begins, initially driven mostly by kin selection. When that small group,
called the founder population, later rejoins the main population, that nucleus
of cooperators influences the rest of the population to cooperate. Another
solution lies in repeated interactions with the same player and the shadow
of the future. In this case, players realize that, although cheating may offer
a short-term advantage, it is better to cooperate in view of future rounds
because the tit-for-tat strategy is about losing battles but winning the war.
Another variable to consider is open-book play and reputation; that is, the
ability for players to see what another’s strategy has been in other games.
Still another variable is the interspersing of multiple games, in which the
level of cooperation in one game can influence the level of cooperation 
in another, resulting in an equilibrium state of cooperation in both
games. (Figure 12c)
Punishment is another great impetus for cooperation. Cooperation emerges
when punishment is allowed in single-round, closed-book games. Cooperation
also flourishes when there is the potential for “altruistic punishment.” That
is, A does something bad to B, and C, as a disinterested outsider, punishes
A for doing so. Taken one step further, secondary punishment is introduced,
wherein both cheaters and anyone who knowingly fails to punish a cheater
are punished. Honor codes at military schools and universities engender
cooperation through the threat of such secondary punishment. Choice as to
whom to play with out of a pool of potential partners enables players to select
for cooperation. Choice as to whether you play or not is another option.
Other games in the repertoire of game theory include Chicken, the Ultimatum
Game, and the Battle of the Sexes. Intrinsic to all this behavior in games is
something obvious to just about anyone: Humans do not always make rational
economic choices; we are not rational in reciprocal altruistic interactions.
Studying the evolution of reciprocity has culminated in the development
of the field of neuroeconomics: imaging the brain during game playing and
decision making. Some classic findings have come about from this imaging.
The outcome in a Prisoner’s Dilemma game that is revealed through brain
imaging to be the most powerful stimulus of the dopamine-releasing pleasure
pathway is a surprise, to some, at least: cooperation between both players. In
another scenario, when a choice must be made between a cheap, fast payoff
and a much greater reward later, the frontal cortex, which plays a central role
in gratification postponement and resistance of the temptation of a quick,
small payoff, is shown to be more activated.
The Runaway Trolley quandary in philosophy is another classic problem.
You have two choices to save lives on a runaway trolley that is racing down
a track about to hit and kill five people: Either you can pull a lever that will 
divert the trolley to another track where it will kill only one person or you
can push one large person onto the track and that will stop the trolley before it
hits the five people. With either choice, you will kill one person to save five.
We tend to make completely different decisions depending on the emotional
salience of how a problem is presented. In this quandary, most people choose
to pull the lever. When a person is contemplating pulling the lever, the frontal
cortex activates. But when the person is contemplating pushing someone off
the trolley to his death, the limbic system activates. Cortical versus limbic
activation is identified, depending on the emotionality with which a problem
is framed. 
Evolution is about changing frequencies of genes over time, and the
first two lectures of this module focus on what genes actually are and
what they do. Key points will be how genes evolve and what genes
have to do with the brain and behavior. The latter two lectures will focus
on what initially seems to be a simple question: How can you tell when a
behavior has a genetic component? As will be seen, this question is vastly
difficult to answer. The main intellectual thrust of this section will be to
teach how pointless the nature/nurture debate is when considering genes and
the brain. 
The basic theme of the last three lectures has been understanding how
this or that behavior has “evolved.” “Evolved” really implies changes
in genes over time. And what do genes have to do with behavior?
In studying what genes actually do, we must begin with the function and
structure of proteins. (Figure 13a) Things we have encountered so far in
the course that are made of protein include receptors for hormones and
neurotransmitters, many neurotransmitters and hormones themselves, and
the enzymes that make them and break them down.
Proteins are made of a 20-letter alphabet of amino acids. Each of the 20
different amino acids has a different shape. When you string the amino
acids together to form a protein, each protein has its own unique shape. The
shape of a protein determines its function. Just think of the protein key (of a 
hormone, for example) fitting into a protein lock (its receptor). Genes specify
the amino acid sequence that determines the function of a protein.
In the next step in studying what genes actually do, we must look at how
the synthesis of proteins is directed. (Figure 13b) DNA is composed of long
strings of a four-letter alphabet of molecules. A combination of three of
those DNA letters in a row codes for one of the amino acids. A string of
those three-letter DNA codes in a row instructs the string of amino acids
that are stuck together to form a particular protein. There are unique threeletter DNA codes that indicate the beginning and end of the DNA stretch that
codes for a specific protein. The stretch of DNA that makes up the complete
code for a single type of protein is called a gene. The human genome (the
totality of DNA codes) contains about 30,000 genes. This 30,000-gene-long
book of DNA can get cumbersome; for this reason, it is broken into separate
volumes, called chromosomes.
Finally, in studying what genes actually do, we come to the intervening step
of RNA. A single copy of each book of DNA exists in each cell, stored in
the nucleus. However, protein synthesis occurs in every far-flung corner of a
cell. For convenience, when a gene is activated to direct the construction of
57
its cognate protein, an RNA “photocopy” of that gene is made and shipped to
the part of the cell where that protein is needed.
How do genes evolve? When a cell divides, a copy of all the DNA is made
for the new cell. A mutation is an error in that copying, and when such an
error occurs in an egg or sperm, it can be inherited. Deletion and insertion
mutations are typically disasters,
producing a nonfunctional
protein. Point mutations can
produce subtle changes in
protein shape and, thus, protein
function. This is the grist of
evolution. A receptor for some
neurotransmitter becomes a little
bit more or less responsive to the
messenger than it used to be. An
enzyme that synthesizes some
hormone is a little more or less
active than it used to be. And as we saw back in Lecture 3, one’s level of
anxiety can be influenced by how well one’s benzodiazepine receptors work.
From there, we can go back to Darwin and ask if a genetic change makes the
organism more or less likely to reproduce.
I assume you spent the break looking for your receipt to get reimbursed
for this course; after all, the last lecture was nothing but shameless lies
to you. What we need to do is see what is actually going on.
What do we know at this point? Continuous stretches of genes
contain coding for different proteins. Mutations within genes
change the function of the protein they produce. Genes, however,
are not continuous in DNA. (Figures 14a, 14b, and 14c) Introns are
intervening sequences of DNA that break up genes into parts called exons.
We can temporarily consider the intervening DNA, which accounts for
95 percent of all DNA, to be “junk.” A whole protein is made out of this
fragmented DNA code with splicing enzymes, that is, enzymes that cut out
the intervening sequences and pull the protein together.
Now we can explore the potential for macroevolutionary change. (Figure
14d) Previously, we saw evolution producing changes in function of 
preexisting genes. Now, we come to evolution producing entirely new genes.
If there is a mutation in a gene coding for a splicing enzyme, the result may
be the generation of two different proteins, two different messengers from
the same precursor. Another route for macro-evolutionary change can be
found in transposable genetic elements. The heresy and ultimate triumph
of Barbara McClintock’s theory of “jumping genes” is an epic story. What
sorts of species have lots of transposable genetic events? Species that can’t
run away from stressors, such as plants. Parasites that are trying to evade
an immune system. Immune systems that are trying to get those parasites.
The consequence of a transposable genetic event in an egg or sperm is the
potential for the inheritance of an entirely new gene.
One last major complexity entails promoters and transcription factors that are
the instructions for when genes are activated, when gene transcription should
begin, and when the gene should start making an RNA copy and splicing.
(Figure 14e) Now we need to revisit that noncoding (intronic) DNA that we
temporarily called “junk.” Instead of being junk, that noncoding DNA often
decides when a gene is turned on or off. Regulation of gene transcription
requires promoters and transcription factors. Promoters are the switches that
turn gene transcription on and off. Transcription factors are proteins that
throw those switches.
What regulates transcription factors? (Figure 14f) The world within the
cell but outside the nucleus can determine when a gene is turned on. The
world within the organism but outside the cell can activate a gene. The
outside environment can trigger internal reactions that turn a gene on. The
introduction of “if-then” clauses adds another dimension into gene regulation.
Hypothetically, if you start with an established if-then clause (If it is the dry
season, then retain water.) and add one mutational event, you have a new
genetic if-then clause (If it is the dry season, then ovulate.). Punctuated
equilibrium is a theory that evolution actually involves long periods of stasis
interspersed with periods of relatively rapid and dramatic changes.
We must place genes in the context of environment. Genes no more give
commands than do telephone books. You cannot understand genes without
understanding their regulation by the environment, which makes “gene
versus environment” or “nature versus nurture” debates meaningless. We also
have to consider macroevolutionary changes in gene regulation. What if you
have a mutation in a promoter sequence? What if you have a transposable
event in a promoter sequence? Evolution works faster on introns than on
exons. Therefore, evolution is more about changes in the regulation of genes
by the environment than about changes in genes themselves and the proteins 
hey code for. A final point is that there are more genes whose expression is
unique to the brain than to any other part of the body. 
First, let’s look at behavior genetics as a discipline. In Lectures 10–
12, we saw how an evolutionary biologist infers that something
is “genetic.” In Lectures 13 and 14, we learned how a molecular
biologist infers that something is “genetic.” In this lecture, we will see that a
behavior geneticist infers that something is “genetic” by comparing patterns
of shared behaviors and shared genes in a population. For starters, let’s look
at everything we have learned so far
and determine what it does not mean
to say that a behavior is “genetic”:
Genes are not deterministic; they do
not inevitably cause some behavior;
and they are not impervious to
environment. Instead, genes can only
support propensities or tendencies to
a particular behavior.
An initial simplistic approach is to
say that genes run in families; thus, if
a behavior runs in a family, it must be genetic. The flaw in that approach
is that environment runs in families as well. A slightly less simplistic
approach theorizes that close relatives share more genes in common than
distant relatives; thus, if a behavior is shared more among close than distant
relatives, it must be genetic. One example of this approach, which we will
examine more deeply later in this lecture, is the covariance of relatedness
and the incidence of depression. The flaw here, however, is that environment
is shared more among close relatives than distant ones.
One sophisticated contemporary
approach states: “If two
individuals raised in an identical
environment but with different
genes differ in a behavior,
then that behavioral difference
can’t be due to environment.”
(Figure 15a) This brings us to
the gold mine of comparing
identical and fraternal twins.
The general approach is to
study identical twins raised
in the same household and
fraternal twins raised in the
same household. If the study
of fraternal twins reveals
differences, the assumption
is that those differences must
reflect genetics, given the shared
environment. An example of
findings with this approach is
the study of the heritability of
obsessive-compulsive disorder.
One problem with the twin
approach is that environment is not identical, particularly for fraternal twins
and especially if fraternal twins are of different genders.
A study of the influence of gender and math skills underscores the potential
importance of environmental factors. A small difference in average
performance and a big difference in the extremes of math achievement
between boys and girls were discovered. Differences were demonstrable
among early adolescents, at a level when all students took the same classes.
Hence, we have the claim by the authors of the study that the educational
environment was identical. But were the students’ educational environments
identical? Not when boys are praised by teachers in that environment more
than girls and girls underestimate their math abilities even when those
abilities show the same level of performance as that of boys. Another study
looked at the differences in activity in newborns as a function of gender and
ethnicity, but environmental differences can be shown to exist even within
minutes of birth.
Another contemporary approach states, “If two individuals share many
genes but live in different environments and if they share a behavior, then
that behavior must be genetic.” This leads to the classic adoption approach,
an example of which is the Kety studies and the genetic contribution to
schizophrenia. (Figure 15b) There are problems with this approach as well.
Are environments really different? No, not with nonrandom placement by
adoption agencies trying to place children with parents of the same race
and ethnicity and other factors. Another flaw with this approach is the
reality that an adopted child shared a great deal with its mother in the fetal
environment.
Another contemporary approach states, “If two individuals with identical
genes but raised in different environments share a behavior, then that
behavior must be genetic.” Identical twins separated at birth are the holy
grail of behavior genetics. The sorts of findings involving such individuals 
include the extent of heritability for IQ, introversion/extroversion, and degree
of aggression. There are some drawbacks with this approach as well because
environment and genetics are so closely intertwined.
Another contemporary approach states, “If a behavior is demonstrable
before there are any relevant environmental influences, then it must
be genetic.” Some animal examples support that approach. Rhesus
monkeys raised in isolation express subordinate gestures when confronted
with a threatening rhesus face. Rodents raised in a lab have an aversion to
cat smell. Some human examples support that approach as well. Babies who
are blind smile at the same age socially as infants who can see. Likewise,
congenitally deaf babies begin babbling at the same time as hearing babies.
The major problem with this approach is that environment does not begin
at birth. A fetus shares an intimate circulatory environment with its mother
and her environment. What outside influences reach a fetus? Hormones:
Whatever hormonal events are going on in the mother’s body can influence
the offspring. Nutrients: Glucose and other nutrients are delivered to the
baby through the mother’s bloodstream. Sounds: After developing a working
auditory system, a fetus can hear sounds.
The endocrine environment for a fetus is affected in many ways. Hormones
can reach the fetal circulation transplacentally. Mechanisms at the placental
boundary prevent some hormones from reaching the fetus, but many get
through. Because a rodent fetus is getting bathed in the hormones of its
closest sibling, hormonal events may depend on whether the sibling next to
it in the uterus is the same sex. If female rodents are exposed to a lot of male
sex hormones during development, they will start ovulating at a later age than
the average female, and they will become infertile at an earlier age. Likewise,
they will show more characteristics of rough-and-tumble play as rat pups.
The amount of stress hormones a mother secretes during pregnancy can
affect a fetus’s development as well. In rodents, long-lasting effects can be
seen in brain development, cognition, and emotion. Stress during pregnancy
can also lead to
the “nongenetic”
inheritance of traits
across generations.
Prenatal maternal
stress during the
third trimester has
been found to lead
to smaller head
circumference in
human babies.
The nutritional environment for a fetus is equally important. Food availability
in the outside world gets translated into nutrient levels in the fetal circulation.
An astonishing example is metabolic programming and the Dutch Hunger
Winter of 1944−1945. Prenatal malnutrition led to development of the thrifty
metabolism in fetuses. Later in life, individuals who developed such thrifty
metabolisms were found to develop long-term disease consequences, such as
increased risk of hypertension, obesity, adult-onset diabetes, and metabolic
syndrome. The multigenerational consequences of such deprivation have
also been identified, including subtle malnutrition of fetuses born of women
who developed the thrifty metabolism.
A third area of interest is the auditory environment for a fetus. The body is
a great resonating chamber; thus, when a mother reads to her unborn baby,
her voice resonates internally, and the fetus senses the rhythm and meter of
the sound of books being read. Studies of prenatal learning show that babies
recognize the difference between new books and books read to them by their
mothers during the last trimester of their development. Studies of fathers’ or
other outsiders’ readings do not show the same results.
The implications of prenatal environmental effects are extraordinary. Traits
can be inherited multigenerationally and have nothing to do with genetics.
Some final critical points still must be covered: What does it mean when
a behavior in a plant or animal is found to be, say, 60 percent “heritable”?
69
(Figures 16a and
16b) Everyone thinks
this term means that
some gene(s) is 60
percent responsible
for controlling some
behavior. What
heritability actually
means is the degree to
which genes account
for the variance of
some trait, not the
average amounts of some trait. You cannot determine what percentage of
a behavior is under the control of genetics. Gene-environment interactions
must be considered, not just genes or environment. An amazing example:
A certain type of serotonin transporter gene increases your risk of clinical
depression if and only if you are raised in a stressful environment.
The lectures in this module focus on how insights about the human
brain and behavior can be derived from the study of animals in their
natural habitat. This approach, termed ethology, developed as a
counter to behaviorist psychology, which basically had the view that a rat
equals a pigeon equals a monkey equals a human and that rules of behavior
are universal, transcending particular species. Ethology counters this view,
and the purpose of these lectures will be to examine the neurobiology of
human behavior in the context of our being only one of many social species. 
A huge percentage of what we know about the brain bases of behavior
comes from the study of laboratory animals. The field of ethology
was founded on the utterly correct idea that an animal in captivity
rarely behaves normally. The rationale for studying ethology is that if you
really want to understand an animal’s behavior, you have to study it in the
context of that animal’s natural setting. Back to the limbic system: How do
you understand how a brain region influences a particular behavior if you
do not understand the behavior? And how normal is an animal’s behavior in
a cage? Thus developed the field of ethology: the study of animals in their
natural setting.
The historical context of ethology is interesting because it developed as a
counterbalance to behaviorism. In the mid-20th century, psychology in
America was dominated by behaviorism. B. F. Skinner, the most famous
adherent to behaviorism, believed, “Pigeon, rat, monkey, boy. It doesn’t
matter.” He believed that all behavior could be shaped by reward and
punishment. Meanwhile, out in the marshes and woods of Europe, ethology
was being founded. One of the founders, Niko Tinbergen, summed up his
philosophy in this sentence: “An experiment should be like a conversation
with an animal…but in the animal’s own language.” Tinbergen, Karl von
Frisch, and Konrad Lorenz won a Nobel Prize for founding ethology. They
believed that the behavior of any given species is a unique set of solutions to
a unique history of environmental challenges.
We need to look at the approach of ethology. The first question Tinbergen,
von Frisch, and Lorenz asked was always: “What’s the behavior?” They 
looked for the fixed action patterns (FAPs) and strived to objectively
describe the behavior. The second question they asked was: “What is the
behavior good for?” They studied the adaptive value of the behavior. The
third question they asked was: “What triggers this behavior? What were the
releasing stimuli for the FAP? Finally, they asked: “How is the behavior
mediated physiologically?” What were the innate releasing mechanisms that
led to the behavior? They also looked at what role learning plays in behavior,
including imprinting and prepared learning, which will be covered in
Lecture 18.
FAPs merit more detailed study. Is talking about FAPs just a fancy way of
talking about “instincts”? Ethologists tried to tame the notions of instincts
for aggression or maternal behavior or xenophobia
and break them down into FAPs—more manageable
packages for narrow, explicit behaviors. Ethologists
observed that FAPs are expressed in the absence
of learning and experience but are subsequently
shaped by experience.
We have several examples of FAPs. Baby squirrels
know how to crack nuts the first time they see one.
They do not need to learn by trial and error or by
mimicking an adult squirrel. However, the more
they do it, the better and faster they get. As we have
seen, isolation-reared vervet monkeys recognize
and react appropriately to a threatening vervet
monkey face. With more social experience, the
isolation-reared monkey learns more appropriate behavior. Vervet monkeys
also have two different alarm calls, one signaling others to get up a tree
because a snake is approaching and one signaling others to get down because
a raptor bird is coming. The proof that adult vervets understand the principles
of ethology comes in discovering that adults ignore these vocalizations when
they are emitted by young monkeys because the young are likely to give
incorrect signals; they do not react until an adult vervet confirms the alarm
call. Human infants smile even in utero, but we learn to smile in appropriate
Baby squirrels
know how to
crack nuts the
first time they see
one. They do not
need to learn by
trial and error or
by mimicking an
adult squirrel.
73
contexts. Perfect pitch in humans has a significant genetic component, but it
also requires a musical environment early in life for it to develop.
The adaptive value of FAPs is also worth examining more closely. The
ethologists’ view of the adaptive value of FAPs differs from the justso stories of many evolutionary biologists. Some examples of adaptive
behavior prove the point. Tinbergen discovered that gulls turn the eggshells
of their chicks to show the outer speckled side after the chick has hatched
to protect the chicks from predators. This works, because the pure white
inner-shell fragments more readily attract the attention of a predator. Von
Frisch studied bee dances, which bees use to communicate to other bees the
location of a food source. Sick lizards give themselves a fever, aiding their
immune systems.
We start with the basic questions of ethology and its intersection
with neurobiology. After studying FAPs and adaptive value,
ethologists look at releasing stimuli. This intersection of sensory
systems and the limbic system explains why scientists used to call the limbic
system the “nose brain” (rhinencephalon). The experimental approach
includes substitution, replication, and superstimulation. Examples of releasing
stimuli reveal that there are all different types of sensory communication
and that they differ dramatically from species
to species.A male deer attracts a mate by
vocalizing; an electric fish, in contrast, courts
through emitting electric “songs.” Turkey
mating requires visual stimuli. Olfaction and
mating among rodents involves pheromones.
Through pheromonal information alone, these
animals can tell what the gender of another
rodent is, what that individual’s health status
is, whether it is stressed or scared, and whether
it is ovulating or has testes.
What releasing stimulus makes an infant
monkey become attached to its mother? The
brilliant, disturbing studies of Harry Harlow showed that, when given a choice
between an artificial mother that was made of chicken wire and gave milk
and a similar chicken-wire mother who gave no milk but was covered with
soft felt, the baby monkeys chose the felt-covered mothers. This experiment
marked the defeat of simplistic behaviorism. Threatening faces and activation
of the amygdala in humans serve as another example. Is the face of someone
of another race a releasing stimulus for amygdala activation? It depends on
the setting and context. Experiments have shown that if a viewer is forced to
think of the person of another race as an individual (through a subtly worded
question, for example), the amygdala does not activate when that person’s
picture is viewed.
Ethologists also study innate releasing mechanisms. This used to be an area
where ethologists just speculated. The blending of the techniques of ethology
and of neurobiology has led to some striking discoveries. Scientists now
understand the neurobiology of seasonal bird song dialects. The circuitry
diagram of the lordosis reflex has been charted with a neuroethological
map. Trauma produces a hyperreactive amygdala, and scientists are close to
constructing a circuitry map for posttraumatic stress disorder.
Learning is an area that ethologists have studied as well. To a behaviorist,
learning is related to the world of punishment and rewards. One depressing
example that runs counter to the behaviorist view, while supporting that of
ethology, concerns cases of abuse: Why do some of us love individuals who
treat us poorly? What learning means to an ethologist is different from what
learning is to behaviorists. Traditional learning: Ethologists have found
that traditional learning occurs in unlikely places. For example, they have
found that primate maternal competence is not an instinct; it is learned over
time. Imprinting: In working with ducklings, Lorenz studied imprinting and
saw how baby ducks learned to identify their mother. Prepared learning:
Ethologists found that certain behaviors are learned more easily than others.
Naïve birds exposed to songs from their own species and those of a related
species are more likely to learn songs of their own species. Monkeys are
predisposed to be terrified of snakes. The sauce béarnaise syndrome shows
that humans who are nauseated associate their sickness with tastes more
readily than with sounds. Babies can learn the phonemes of any language
but are better at recognizing language than nonlanguage sounds.
The place of ethology is critically important. Studying behavior in its natural
setting is truly helpful. We cannot understand the brain and how it works
without understanding the special evolutionary and ecological settings, the 
solutions, and the language of behavior that each species has developed.But
what is the natural setting of a human? 
The previous modules have examined how the brain produces individual
differences in behavior and how such brain function is regulated.
With this interdisciplinary approach in hand, this final module applies
this framework to an actual example of behavior. To do so, we will focus
on the neurobiology of aggression. This subject has been chosen for two
reasons. First, an enormous amount is known about the subject (far more
than, say, parental behavior, attachment, or language use), and the subject is
particularly amenable to an integration of the various approaches introduced
in this course. Second, there are few subjects more important for people to
understand—a dire threat to our future is the human capacity for violence.
The structure of these lectures will be to first present an extensive overview
of the neurobiology of aggression, including the relevant parts of the brain
and the neurotransmitters involved. Following that, we will examine how
that neurobiology has been influenced by the other factors in the course,
beginning with the hormones that may have altered the functioning of
neurons one second before the aggressive act occurred, through the other
factors, and ending with the evolution of aggression.
What have we accomplished so far? We have studied the biological
components of behavior from a single neuron to neuronal
networks to the many parts of the brain, and we have studied
other disciplines that help us better understand human behavior. We have
emphasized, throughout the course, the importance of the interaction and
interdependency of these disciplines. Next, we move to an attempt at further
integration in studying the neurobiology of aggression.
What do we mean by aggression? If we look at human aggression in the
context of other animals, we need to ask if we are the only species that: Kills?
Kills infants? Has organized group violence?
The answer to all of these questions is no.
Animal reins on aggression include hierarchies
(including bottom-up ones) and reconciliation.
We do see some human specialties when it
comes to aggression. We can communicate
aggression with abstraction over space and
time. Some people display sexual aggression.
We have created a technology of aggression,
going beyond muscle and teeth to intentional invention of tools of destruction.
We have developed organized aggression above the level of a local band. We
exhibit passive aggression. This is a difficult subject because we all know the
pleasures of a well-timed act of aggression.
We continue by implicating the limbic system in aggression. The KluverBucy syndrome was an experimental technique that was done on laboratory 
animals in the 1930s, whereby a region of the limbic system was removed.
Such animals displayed abnormal sexual behavior and odd levels of
aggression. The amygdala is highly relevant and highly implicated in studying
aggression. Some of the experimental techniques that have implicated
the amygdala include creation of brain lesions, stimulation, recording,
and functional brain imaging. Another implication of the amygdala in 
aggression is the study of Charles Whitman, a mass murderer in the 1960s.
When he was autopsied after he killed himself, he was found to have an
amygdaloid tumor.
What are the inputs to and outputs from the amgydala? (Figure 19a) Inputs
include stress hormones, pain, and filtered and unfiltered sensory information.
Outputs include projections to the brain regions that regulate the sympathetic
nervous system, stress hormone release, and motoric output. Is the amygdala
about aggression or about fear and anxiety? (Figure 19b) Fear conditioning
and the amygdala show that you can learn fearful responses. Stress can lead
to amygdaloid expansion and posttraumatic stress disorder. As we saw in
Lecture 18, amygdaloid activation when we see a person of another race is
not a hard-wired fear but can be conditioned. exual arousal and amygdaloid
activation in males may provide a link to sexual violence.
Other brain structures are relevant in our study of aggression. The septum
puts the metaphorical brake on aggression, working in opposition to the
amygdala. The lateral hypothalamus was thought for decades to be tied to
aggression. More recently, however, this part of the brain has been found to
be related to feeding (including predatory hunting) rather than to aggression.
Hindbrain and brainstem structures become metabolically active and cause
arousal during both extremely violent states and greatly euphoric states,
hence the famous quote from Nobel Laureate Elie Weisel: “The opposite of
love is not hate. The opposite of love is indifference.” 
The critical role of the frontal cortex is to get you to do the harder
thing. (Figure 20a) First, we look at doing the harder thing in the
cognitive realm. Executive function helps you strategize what to
do with facts. It is your working memory. Reversal tasks, such as reciting
months and numbers backwards, reveal how difficult it is to overcome
ingrained patterns. Neurons of the frontal cortex activate in response to rules
rather than in response to specific examples.
Next, we look at doing the harder thing in the realm of emotional regulation
and emotional disinhibition. Phineas Gage, a railroad worker in the 1840s,
suffered a frontal cortical lesion in a serious accident. Overnight, he changed
from a sober man to a profane, aggressive, socially inappropriate man who
could never work again. The loss of his frontal cortex meant he lost his
emotional regulation; he had no means to do the “harder thing.” Frontotemporal
dementia and
stroke damage
to the frontal
cortex may cause
inappropriate,
d i s i n h i b i t e d
behaviors. The
frontal cortex
goes offline
during rapid
eye movement
(REM) sleep,
which explains
why dreams are often wild and unrepressed. Frontal hyperactivity can result
in repressive personalities—individuals with tightly regulated emotions.
Finally, we look at doing the harder thing in the realm of behavior. We saw
in Lecture 12 the role of frontal cortical activation during decision making
and gratification postponement. (Figure 20b) The study of frontal function
in violent sociopaths reveals two very interesting results. These individuals
often exhibit abnormally low basal activity or histories of frontal damage.
They also often exhibit abnormally high activity when engaged in an
executive task—in other words, they need to activate more of the frontal
cortex than other people in order to regulate their behavior appropriately.
The frontal cortex among primates is fairly large and well developed, but
humans have a uniquely large frontal cortex. The study of the frontal cortex
and development in humans has also been revelatory. Children are frontally
disinhibited beings. Adolescents still are frontally disinhibited beings because
of the remarkably late maturation of the frontal cortex. With this in mind, we
need to ask if a 16-year-old violent criminal is, by definition, organically
impaired in frontal cortical function.
The frontal cortex and its interactions with other brain regions are important
to our understanding of aggression. The frontal cortex is an inhibitor of the
amygdala. Conversely, the amygdala sends inputs to the frontal cortex to do
the easier thing. Serotonergic projections are also sent into the frontal cortex
and play a role in inhibiting impulsive behavior. Therefore, low serotonin
levels are associated with impulsive aggression. The dopamine projection
is sent from the ventral tegmentum into the frontal cortex. Dopamine is
the neurotransmitter of pleasure or, more correctly, of the anticipation of
pleasure. Dopamine, metaphorically, fuels the ability of the frontal cortex to
hold out for the harder thing.
A subtlety of frontal cortical function during aggression merits discussion.
Sometimes inhibiting aggression is a case of doing the harder thing, as when
you are angry and wish to lash out but control yourself. On the other hand,
there are situations in which being aggressive is a case of doing the harder
thing, as in wartime when you must choose to fight amid a strong incentive
to flee.
What releasing stimuli bias the nervous system toward aggression? Fear, pain,
stress, and frustration are all routes for decreased dopamine transmission.
The role of alcohol in violence has been overrated; alcohol causes violence
in individuals already prone to violence. Likewise, the role of crowding
85
has been overrated. Like alcohol, crowding causes violence in individuals
already prone to violence.
We also need to look at acute hormonal effects on the neurobiology of
aggression, particularly the key role of testosterone in male aggression.
Correlative evidence gives us the first clues. Testosterone levels and levels
of aggression are a function of gender, age, and season. There are a lot
of testosterone receptors in the amygdala. Causal evidence includes the
euphemistically termed subtraction and replacement approaches. With
subtraction, the testes are removed from a male, and his aggression levels are
found to go down. With replacement, after removal of the testes, the male’s
testosterone is replaced by synthetic testosterone, and his aggressive behavior
returns. We now have evidence that shows the limited role of testosterone
in aggression. (Figure 20c) Castration reduces but does not eliminate
aggression. The more precastration aggressive experience an individual has,
the greater the amounts of his postcastration aggression.
Does testosterone cause aggression? The answer relates to the metaphor
of increasing the volume of the radio playing martial music, rather
than turning on the radio in the first place. Neurobiological evidence
states that testosterone does not activate amygdaloid neurons (turn on the
radio) but, rather, makes amygdaloid neurons that are already excited more
excitable (turn up the volume). Do individual differences in testosterone
levels explain individual differences in levels of aggression? (Figure 21a)
Fluctuation in testosterone levels within the physiological range does not
generally cause changes in aggression. But there is a consistent correlation
between the two, with aggression elevating testosterone levels, rather than
the other way around. Testosterone levels above the normal range may result
when someone takes anabolic steroids. The conclusion is that one hormone
cannot explain aggression. A striking example of proof comes from studying
murder rates in London, Toronto, and Detroit. In men in all three cities,
the highest levels of aggression were found to occur at the same ages (late
adolescence/ young adulthood). However, amid that similarity, there were
enormous differences in the absolute number of murders among the three
cities, showing the importance of environment in aggression. (Figure 21b)
We also need to look at hormones and female aggression. Testosteronerelated (androgenic) hormones come from the adrenal gland. Estrogen and
progesterone are also relevant for female aggression. The ratio of the two is
more important than the levels. Fluctuating ratios around menstruation have
been tied to patterns of criminal behavior in women during the perimenstrual
period. Fluctuating ratios around parturition explain why you do not pick up
cute newborn kittens when their mother is nearby.
We must also consider stress hormones and aggression in both genders.
Sympathetic nervous system activity is a nonspecific marker in aggression.
Glucocorticoids can have two interesting yet disturbing effects.
Glucocorticoids can cause enhancement of amygdaloid function, leading to
posttraumatic stress disorder. Glucocorticoids can cause disruption of frontal
cortical function, causing us to make imprudent decisions in moments
of stress.
Some major theories about environmental factors in aggression are worthy of
consideration. The Lorenzian notion that aggression is universal, inevitable,
and self-depleting is not tenable. Marxist models of aggression are based on
fear and resource inequity, but many types of animal aggression have been
identified when resources are plentiful. The behaviorist view was that the
right reinforcement schedule can make aggression disappear, but a 225-yearlong experiment partially refutes this view: The death penalty tends to drive
down instances of premeditated
violence, but it has little effect on
impulsive violent behavior.
We now turn to child development,
aggression, and empathy. The
differentiation of the self in toddlers
is key. Ego boundary issues exist
because a toddler is distinguishing
where his mother ends and he
begins as an individual. Studies
have shown that other species have
a self-concept as well. The emergence of theory of mind is the recognition
that other individuals have other thoughts and knowledge than you. Human
versions display a recognition that others have different feelings, needs, and
capacities for pain than oneself. Nonhuman primate versions have shown
that a chimpanzee can understand what information another chimpanzee has
and can shape its behavior accordingly. The emergence of empathy begs the
question as to whether theory of mind is necessary and/or sufficient to give
rise to that quality. What appears to be empathy in toddlers, who do not yet
demonstrate theory of mind, may instead be an expression of ego boundary
problems or distress reduction.
The learning of rules about the appropriate context for aggression often
drives development. We have seen the Harlow studies of social isolation
in young primates in Lecture 18. Learning your rank as a social primate is
part of growing up. Primates who grow up without a mother to show them
the rules may be inappropriately aggressive. Scientists have also studied
whether early exposure to violence begets later violence, thus legitimizing
its rationales and habituating to its harmful consequences. Childhood abuse
studies show that adults who are child abusers tend to have been abused
as children, but most children who are abused do not grow up to be child
abusers. Television violence increases violence in those children who are
already prone toward it. Being raised in cultures with credos of victimization
and justified revenge is more likely to lead to socially inappropriate behavior.
Being raised in authoritarian cultures, with emphases on externalizing of
blame, on conforming, and on rigid, unreflective cognitive styles is also
more likely to lead to socially inappropriate behavior.
We now look at moral development in children. (Figure 22a)
Kohlberg’s three stages of moral development were based on the
immediacy of punishment. In the Pre-Conventional stage, moral
behavior is about the immediate consequences. In the Conventional stage, the
individual leaps into the realm of societal rules and conventions. Individuals
see the consequences of their actions down the road (“I’ll eventually get
caught” or “What if everybody did this?”). In the Post-Conventional stage,
the sense of morality is that the right thing is independent of contracts and
rules and convention. Actions are based more on simply deciding to do the
right thing, no matter what the laws or consequences are. Some people never
attain that stage. Critiques of Kohlberg say that the stages fit males more
than females and are culturally biased as well, being quite Eurocentric.
Does one’s Kohlberg stage actually predict anything about behavior? Not
especially. Does it help us predict who will step out of a crowd to do the hard
but right thing? Not particularly. A better predictor is doing moral acts as a
frequent childhood imperative.
How do we frame the possible neurobiological underpinnings of moral
developmental stages? Is climbing up the Kohlberg ladder merely a function
of getting a more mature frontal cortex that has more and more potentiated
pathways and is more adept at gratification postponement? Yet most
advanced stages of moral development seem
outside the purview of the frontal cortex. This
is the realm where no degree of gratification
postponement can explain doing the harder
thing; this is because there is no gratification,
and instead, you may be punished for doing
the harder but right thing. Reflexive moral acts
and implicit neural pathways outside the frontal
cortex are still a mystery.
Another issue is development and adolescent
male aggression. We know by now to be wary
of the correlation between a peak in aggression
during adolescence in males and a peak in
testosterone levels. Remember the study of
aggression in young males in London, Toronto,
and Detroit in Lecture 21. A peak in alcoholrelated aggression has been studied in alcoholics. Cross-cultural differences
in aggression dwarf developmental patterns. Again, remember the study of
aggression in young males in London, Toronto, and Detroit. A nonhuman
primate example of this idea is the cultural transmission of a baboon troop’s
social tradition of low aggression. Another predictor of adult antisocial
behavior is being an unwanted child.
We now shift to study long-term physiological effects in the form of
perinatal hormones. We look first at organizational effects of hormones
during perinatal life as opposed to activational effects during adulthood. The
organizational effects of androgens on subsequent aggression are of great
interest. Rodent studies (such as fetal positioning), as we saw in Lecture
16, show that prenatal testosterone masculinizes patterns of aggression and
makes for individuals, including females, who are more aggressive and
more easily provoked toward aggression. Primate studies show the same
results. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia in human females is the result of
being exposed to a lot of testosterone prenatally. These girls grow up to
display higher than expected levels of aggression and less interest in genderspecific toys. However, they also have been exposed to multiple painful and
embarrassing surgeries and often are treated differently by parents because
of their ambiguous gender, all of which may affect behavior.
Now we shift one step further back and look at the long-term physiological
effects of genes. This is a dirty concept in many quarters, implying the
shadows of eugenics and of washing one’s hands of unappealing behaviors.
Yet there must be a genetic component to aggression. Otherwise, why you
would trust your baby to a beagle more readily than to a pit bull? What genes
are likely to be relevant to aggression? The answer is those genes related
to pain thresholds, frustration thresholds, impulsivity, sensation-seeking,
and emotional regulation. In that context, a number of genes that have been
implicated in aggressive behavior relate to neurotransmitter systems—genes
that are relevant to many other realms of behavior as well.
We can consider a model for how genetic influences might work. As a
review, we saw in Lecture 16 a study of a large population of children
that showed a correlation between serotonin and depression in certain
environments. Further study was done of different versions of genes
relevant to serotonin synthesis, degradation, transport, and so on. It
was found that a certain gene variant or monoamine oxidase (MAO) is
predictive of antisocial behavior in humans but only when coupled with a
childhood history of abuse. (Figure 22b)
Let’s end the lecture by debunking an urban myth about genes and aggression.
While in prison, Richard Speck, a mass murderer from the 1960s, was
discovered to be an XYY male instead of a normal XY male. This prompted
the idea that XYY males were genetically prone toward violence, an idea not
supported by evidence. 
Let’s begin by looking at some ecological correlates of aggression.
Warrior classes and high levels of aggression are more common
among pastoralists than among agriculturalists. Organized aggression
is also more common among desert dwellers than among rainforest dwellers.
Why ever be aggressive? Let’s rethink Marlin Perkins’s claim that animals
behave for the good of the species. Individual selection and its propagation
of aggression disprove Perkins’s notion and provide the first bad news
about evolutionary biology. Male-male
aggression for reproductive access to
females is a common form of violence
in primate species, including humans.
Competitive infanticide offers the
most heartbreaking evidence against
group selection.
Kin selection helps explain us/them
dichotomies and the roots of xenophobia.
We have seen the results of kinship and cooperative aggression among male
chimpanzees. We also see kinship and organized aggression in patrilocal
human societies.
Humans, pseudokinship, and pseudospeciation merit examination as
well. Lots of species recognize a relative through innate recognition of
sensory information. Humans recognize relatives through cognitive routes.
An implication of this fact is that a human’s sense of relatedness can be 
manipulated. An example of such manipulation is the sociological concept of
pseudokinship and the idea of “bands of brothers.” Military rituals throughout
human cultures build such a bond. The unprecedented pseudokinship of
American troops in World War II underscores the strength of this bond. The
flip side of pseudokinship is pseudospeciation, where enemies are portrayed
as hardly counting as human.
Let’s now look at the first piece of good news that arises from kin selection. If
you can pseudospeciate someone into being an enemy, you can pseudokinship
back from that state. Rituals of pseudokinship among ex-enemies prove that
this change is possible. We saw another example of this transformation in
Lectures 18 and 19, where we found that viewing strangers as individuals
rather than categorically helped tame the amygdala.
More good news is found in studies of alternative strategies among males in
the primate world. Studies were done of groups of baboons in which malefemale affiliation, rather than male-male competition, drives who females
choose to mate with. Reproductive success among such male baboons has
shown that this is a successful evolutionary alternative.
More good news is evident in reciprocal altruism and cooperation. Back
in Lecture 12, we learned about the Prisoner’s Dilemma and the strategic
advantages of cooperation. We also discussed how to jumpstart cooperation
in game theory settings, looking at the effects of inbred populations, multiple
rounds of games, reputation, punishment of cheaters, and choice of partners
as circumstances that increase the likelihood of increasing cooperation.
Whatever the route, reciprocal altruism and cooperation can emerge, even
in the most inauspicious of circumstances. A vivid example occurred during
World War I, with the Christmas truce and spontaneous mutual restraint in
trench warfare. Maybe, just maybe, there is hope. 
How are we to understand this emerging biology of what makes us
who we are? We must draw a distinction between the essence of
who a person is and the biology that can constrain and distort that
essence. We must be careful in deciding when that distinction is readily made
and when it is not. An examination of some subtle neuropsychiatric disorders
underscores the difficulty of such a distinction. We have discussed the
effects of frontal cortical damage numerous times. In 20, we heard about the
effects of damage to the frontal cortex in Phineas Gage. We have learned that
frontotemporal dementia may cause inappropriate, disinhibited behaviors.
Obsessive-compulsive disorder is a debilitating neuropsychiatric disorder. Its
features include ritualistic counting, obsessive hand-washing, and constant
and repeated checking to ensure that one has completed common activities,
such as locking the door or turning off the gas. We see here an emerging
neurobiology of elevated metabolism in motoric parts of the brain. Tourette’s
syndrome is a disorder with symptoms that
include uncontrollable cursing, facial ticks,
yelps, and inappropriate gestures. It has
received a lot of attention in neuropsychiatric
circles lately. This is not a disinhibition of
the self. It has been termed “hiccups of the
id.” Here we see emerging neurogenetics of
the disease. Schizotypal personality disorder
is a mild version of schizophrenia. It is on
a genetic and symptomatic continuum with
schizophrenia. Its symptoms include social
withdrawal, concreteness in interpretation of events, and metamagical
thinking. Is it a mental illness to consult astrologers? No, these traits are
the extremes of normative thinking. Temporal lobe personality disorder is a
subtype of epilepsy. In temporal lobe epilepsy, seizures start in the temporal
lobe, which is part of the limbic system. Among the disorder’s symptoms is
an obsession with religious and philosophical subjects.
Then comes the challenge of this new information. What happens when we
each have a few of these labels? What happens when this science stops being
about the biology of “them and their diseases” and becomes the biology of
“us and our individuality”? Some societal implications are inevitable. The
downside may be devastating. If you get one of these labels and you are poor
or poorly connected, there are great precedents for you now being treated
poorly by society. The temptation to “fix what ain’t broken” is a historical
force of evil in biology. The important questions are: What counts as being
ill? Who is biologically impaired, and who is just different?
But there is an optimistic side as well. We can strive to reach new realms of
compassion in dealing with debilitating psychiatric diseases and disorders.
We can work to develop pseudokinship through neurobiology, including the
recognition of continua of disorder symptoms and a reality of “There but for
the grace of God go I.” Finally, perhaps we will someday acknowledge that
being healthy consists of having the same diseases as everyone else and the
same values as to what is a disease and what is healthy, what is normal and
what is abnormal.
Some philosophical implications are equally important. What will these
biological insights do to our treasured sense of uniqueness? As science
explains more and more about less and less, will we all be explained as no
more than a mass of neurons and hormones, no longer special and different?
As in the story Nine Billion Names of God, will the stars in the heavens
be extinguished because science will have explained everything in our
universe? Such scientific explanations and progress should not be feared.
To explain something is not to destroy the capacity to be moved by it. And
certainly, we can never explain everything, because every answer opens up
a dozen new questions. To paraphrase Haldane, “Life is not only stranger
than we imagine, life is stranger than we can imagine.” Thus, in the end, the 
purpose of science is not to cure us of our sense of mystery and wonder but
to constantly reinvent and reinvigorate it. 
acetylcholine: A neurotransmitter whose functions include release from the
ends of the final neurons in the parasympathetic nervous system.
action potential: The burst of electrical excitation that shoots down the axon
when a neuron is sufficiently stimulated via its dendrites. (Contrast with
resting potential.)
activational effects of hormones: A hormonal effect (typically in adults)
that has an immediate consequence. (Contrast with organizational effects.)
amino acids: The building blocks of proteins; about 20 different kinds, akin
to letters, exist. Unique sequences of amino acids are strung together to
form a particular protein. That sequence determines the folded shape of that
protein and, thus, its function.
amygdala: A limbic structure with a key role in aggression and fear, as well
as sexual arousal in males.
anabolic hormones: A rather imprecise term typically denoting androgenic
(testosterone-related) hormones.
androgens: A class of steroid hormones, including testosterone, with roles in
aggression and sexual behavior in both sexes but most notably in males. (See
also anabolic hormones.)
autonomic nervous system (ANS): A series of neural pathways originating
in the hypothalamus, hindbrain, and brainstem and projecting throughout
the body; it regulates all sorts of nonconscious, automatic physiological
changes throughout the body. The ANS consists of the sympathetic and
parasympathetic nervous systems.
axon: The part of the neuron that sends signals to other neurons. (Contrast
with dendrite.)
axon hillock: The beginning of the axon; this is the point where small
excitatory inputs from various dendrites are summated and, if of a sufficient
magnitude, trigger an action potential.
axon terminal: The part of the neuron from which neurotransmitters
are released.
behaviorism: The school of American psychology that posited that the
incidence of all behaviors can be shaped by reward and punishment and
that these patterns are sufficiently universal that virtually any vertebrate
species can be a stand-in for learning principles in humans. (Contrast
with ethology.)
benzodiazepines: Compounds that reduce anxiety. Synthetic versions
include Valium and Librium; naturally occurring versions are found within
the brain, but their chemical structure is poorly understood.
central nervous system: The brain and spinal cord. (Contrast with
peripheral nervous system.)
chromosome: A long, continuous sequence of genes. Metaphorically, the
genome is like a massive phone book of information, with each message
being a single gene made up of DNA letters. Because of its size, it is broken
into separate volumes—each volume being a chromosome.
compulsion: See obsessive-compulsive disorder.
congenital adrenal hyperplasia: A disorder in which female fetuses are
exposed to high levels of androgens (male sex hormones).
dendrite: The part of the neuron that receives signals from other neurons.
Dendrites tend to come in the form of highly branched cables coming from
the cell body of a neuron. (Contrast with axon.)
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA): the nucleic acid that carries the genetic
information of the cell.
dopamine: A neurotransmitter whose functions include a role in sequential
thought (such that abnormal dopamine levels are associated with the
disordered thought of schizophrenia), the anticipation of pleasure, and
aspects of fine motor control.
endocrinology: The study of hormones.
epinephrine (a.k.a. adrenaline): Both a neurotransmitter throughout the
brain and a hormone released in the adrenal gland during stress as a result of
activation of the sympathetic nervous system.
estrogen: A class of female reproductive hormones.
ethology: The study of the behavior of animals in their natural environments.
(Contrast with behaviorism.)
excitatory neurotransmitter: See neurotransmitter.
exon: The stretch of DNA coding for a gene can occasionally be broken into
separate parts, called exons. The intervening stretches of DNA, which do not
code for anything, are called introns.
fixed action pattern: A term in ethology referring to a behavior that occurs
in a fairly intact form even in the absence of experience or learning but can
be further refined by experience.
frontal cortex: A recently evolved region of the brain that plays a central role
in executive cognitive function, decision making, gratification postponement,
and regulation of the limbic system.
frontotemporal dementia: A neurological disorder (most often due to a
specific mutation) in which disintegration of the frontal cortex occurs.
game theory: A field of mathematics formalizing strategies used in games of
cooperation and/or competition.
gene: A stretch of DNA that designates the construction of one protein.
gene-environment interaction: The virtually universal phenomenon in
which the effect of a gene varies as a function of the environment in which
it is transcribed.
gene transcription: The process of a gene being “read” and transcribed
into RNA.
glial cells: An accessory type of cell found in the nervous system. Glial
cells support neuronal function by insulating the axons of neurons,
indirectly supplying neurons with energy, scavenging dead neurons, and
removing toxins from the extracellular space around neurons. (Contrast
with neurons.)
glucocorticoids: A class of steroid hormones secreted during stress. They
include cortisol (a.k.a. hydrocortisone) and synthetic versions, such as
prednisone and dexamethasone.
glutamate: An excitatory neurotransmitter with critical roles in learning and
memory. An excess of glutamate induces excitotoxicity, a route by which
neurons are killed during various neurological insults.
gradualism: The theory that evolutionary changes occur constantly, in small,
incremental steps. (Contrast with punctuated equilibrium.) Gradualism
produces microevolutionary changes.
group selection: The mostly discredited notion that evolution works on
groups rather than individuals and, thus, that the evolution of behavior can be
understood in the context of animals behaving “for the good of the species.”
(Contrast with individual selection.)
hippocampus: A brain region within the limbic system that plays a central
role in learning and memory.
hormones: Blood-borne chemical messengers between cells.
hypothalamus: A limbic structure that receives heavy inputs from other parts
of the limbic system; plays a central role in regulating both the autonomic
nervous system and hormone release.
imprinted genes: Genes whose function differs depending on whether they
are inherited from the father or mother. Imprinting of genes in this context
should not be mistaken with the ethological notion of imprinting.
imprinting: An ethological concept in which a permanent change in behavior
occurs rapidly, in the absence of experience (for example, the imprinting of
newborn birds onto their mother).
individual selection: A contemporary notion in evolutionary biology that
natural selection works mostly at the level of the individual and, thus,
that the evolution of behavior can be understood in the context of animals
behaving to maximize the number of copies of their genes passed on to the
next generation. (Contrast with group selection.)
inhibitory neurotransmitter: See neurotransmitter.
innate releasing mechanism (IRM): An ethological term referring to the
physiological mechanisms by which a stimulus (for example, a releasing
stimulus) triggers a behavior (for example, a fixed action pattern).
intron: A stretch of DNA that does not actually code for a gene but, instead,
breaks up a gene into separate parts (called exons).
jumping genes: See transposable genetic elements.
kin selection: A contemporary notion in evolutionary biology that an
individual can maximize the number of copies of his or her genes that are
passed on by aiding the reproduction of relatives.
Kluver-Bucy syndrome: A set of behavioral changes, including elevated
levels of aggression, resulting from removal of large parts of the limbic
system, including the amygdala. 
limbic system: A part of the brain most strikingly involved in emotion. Some
major parts include the hippocampus, amygdala, hypothalamus, and septum.
long-term potentiation (LTP): A phenomenon in which the strength of
synaptic communication between two neurons is enhanced in a persistent
manner; thought to be a cellular analog of learning.
mutation: An error in the copying of a gene. Classically, mutations can take
three forms: In point mutations, a letter in the DNA code is misread as a
different letter. In deletion mutations, a letter is entirely lost. In insertion
mutations, an extra letter is inserted.
myelin sheath: The insulation, made from glial cells, that wraps around the
axons of neurons. Myelin allows action potentials to travel down the axon
more quickly.
neurobiology: The study of the nervous system.
neuroeconomics: A new field examining the brain bases of economic
decision making.
neuroendocrinology: The study of the interactions between the nervous
system and hormones.
neuroethology: The study of the neural mechanisms mediating the
naturalistic behavior of animals.
neurons: The primary cells of the nervous system. (Contrast with glial cells.)
neurotransmitter: Chemical messengers released from axon terminals as
a result of an action potential; these travel across the synapse and bind to
specific receptors on the postsynaptic side, thereby changing the electrical
excitation of the second neuron. Excitatory neurotransmitters increase
the likelihood that the next neuron will have an action potential, whereas
inhibitory neurotransmitters decrease the likelihood.
nongenetic inheritance: A phenomenon in which some event in the fetus
changes the function of that individual when she is an adult, and that change
produces a similar change in her own eventual fetus. Thus, a trait can be
passed on for generations but in a way that does not involve genes and
classic inheritance.
norepinephrine (a.k.a. noradrenaline): A neurotransmitter whose functions
include release from the ends of the final neurons in the sympathetic nervous
system, as well as a role in depression (with, most likely, a depletion occurring).
obsession: See obsessive-compulsive disorder.
obsessive-compulsive disorder: A neuropsychiatric disorder categorized
by virtually ceaseless intrusions of distracting, disturbing, and repetitive
thoughts (obsessions) and by irresistible urges to carry out pointless,
ritualistic behaviors (compulsions).
organizational effects of hormones: Hormonal effects early in life (for
example, in the fetus) that do not have an immediate consequence but that
cause changes in the body’s response to some hormone during adult life.
(Contrast with activational effects.)
pair-bonding species: Species in which mating tends to be monogamous.
(Contrast with tournament species.)
parasympathetic nervous system (PNS): The half of the autonomic
nervous system associated with calm, vegetative function. (Contrast with
sympathetic nervous system.)
peptide hormones: A class of hormones made from amino acids. They
predominately work by changing the activity of preexisting proteins.
peripheral nervous system: Neurons and associated glial cells that occur
outside the brain or spinal cord. (Contrast with central nervous system.)
pituitary: The gland underneath the hypothalamus that releases an array of
hormones under the control of the brain.
plasticity: The general notion of aspects of neural function changing
over time.
Prisoner’s Dilemma: A classic game theory scenario.
progesterone: A class of female reproductive hormones.
promoters: Stretches of DNA that do not code for a gene but serve as the
on-off switch for a gene to be transcribed.
protein: Long strings of amino acids. Unique sequences of amino acids are
strung together to form a particular protein. That sequence determines the
folded shape of that protein and, thus, its function.
pseudokinship: A form of cultural manipulation by which people are led to
view other individuals as more related to them than they actually are.
pseudospeciation: A form of cultural manipulation by which people are led
to view other individuals as less related to them than they actually are.
punctuated equilibrium: The theory that evolution consists of long periods
of stasis, when there are no evolutionary changes, interspersed with periods
of rapid and dramatic change. (Contrast with gradualism.) Punctuated
equilibrium produces macroevolutionary changes.
releasing stimulus: An ethological term referring to the sensory stimulus in
an environment that triggers a behavior.
resting potential: The state of electrical excitation in a neuron when it is
quiescent. (Contrast with action potential.)
ribonucleic acid (RNA): An intermediate form of information. A strand of
RNA is made under the direction of a single gene; that stretch of RNA, in
109
turn, contains the information for the stringing together of amino acids into
a protein.
RNA translation: The process of RNA being “read” and translated
into protein.
schizotypal personality disorder: A neuropsychiatric disorder, on a genetic
continuum with schizophrenia, characterized by social withdrawal, overly
concrete thought, and metamagical beliefs.
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs): Drugs such as Prozac that
block the removal of serotonin from the synapse. Insofar as they lessen the
symptoms of depression, this implies that depression involves a shortage
of dopamine.
septum: Limbic structure with a key role in inhibiting aggression.
serotonin: A neurotransmitter whose functions include a role in aggression,
sleep onset, depression, and impulsivity.
spatial summation: When an action potential is triggered thanks to enough
separate dendritic inputs being stimulated all at once. (Contrast with
temporal summation.)
steroid hormones: A class of hormones made from steroid precursor
molecules that include estrogens, progestins, androgens, glucocorticoids,
and mineralocorticoids. They predominately work by changing genomic
events in cells.
sympathetic nervous system (SNS): The half of the autonomic nervous
system associated with arousal and emergency physiological responses.
(Contrast with parasympathetic nervous system.)
synapse: The space between an axon terminal and the dendritic spine of the
next neuron.
synaptic plasticity: The concept of the strength of communication between
two neurons changing over time.
temporal personality disorder: A neuropsychiatric disorder associated with
temporal lobe epilepsy, characterized by perseverative behavioral patterns,
aversion to novelty, obsessive writing (hypergraphia), and an intense interest
in religious and philosophical subjects.
temporal summation: When an action potential is triggered thanks to the
same subthreshold dendritic input being stimulated over and over. (Contrast
with spatial summation.)
testosterone: A subtype of androgen.
theory of mind: The understanding that other individuals have different
thoughts and knowledge than you; most frequently used as a term in child
development.
thrifty metabolism: The idea that malnutrition during the prenatal
environment causes metabolic “programming” so that for the rest of the
individual’s life, there is more efficient storage of nutrients.
Tourette’s syndrome: A neuropsychiatric disorder categorized by
uncontrolled outbursts of scatology, tics, and utterances.
tournament species: Species in which mating tends to be highly polygamous
and involves high levels of male-male aggression and competition. (Contrast
with pair-bonding species.)
transcription factors: Messengers (often proteins) that bind to promoters
and turn genes on or off.
transposable genetic elements: Stretches of DNA that can be moved
around; also called jumping genes.
111
ventral tegmentum: A brain region that sends dopamine-releasing axons to
the frontal cortex and limbic system, where that dopamine plays a central
role in reward and anticipation of rewards.