All tissues and organs in the body consist of cells. The specialized functions
of cells and how they interact determine the functions of organs. The brain
is an organ—to be sure, the most sophisticated and complex organ that
nature has devised. But the basic strategy for unraveling its function is no
different from that used to investigate the pancreas or the lung. We must
begin by learning how brain cells work individually and then see how they
are assembled to work together. In neuroscience, there is no need to separate
mind from brain; once we fully understand the individual and concerted
actions of brain cells, we will understand the origins of our mental
abilities. The organization of this book reflects this “neurophilosophy.” We
start with the cells of the nervous system—their structure, function, and
means of communication. In later chapters, we will explore how these cells
are assembled into circuits that mediate sensation, perception, movement,
speech, and emotion.
In this chapter, we focus on the structure of the different types of cells
in the nervous system: neurons and glia. These are broad categories, within
which are many types of cells that differ based on their structure, chemistry,
and function. Nonetheless, the distinction between neurons and glia
is important. Although there are many neurons in the human brain (about
100 billion), glia outnumber neurons by tenfold. Based on these numbers,
it might appear that we should focus our attention on glia for insights into
the cellular functions of the nervous system. However, neurons are the
most important cells for the unique functions of the brain. It is the neurons
that sense changes in the environment, communicate these changes to
other neurons, and command the body’s responses to these sensations.
Glia, or glial cells, are thought to contribute to brain function mainly by
insulating, supporting, and nourishing neighboring neurons. If the brain
were a chocolate-chip cookie and the neurons were chocolate chips, the
glia would be the cookie dough that fills all the other space and ensures
that the chips are suspended in their appropriate locations. Indeed, the
term glia is derived from the Greek word for “glue,” giving the impression
that the main function of these cells is to keep the brain from running out
of our ears! As we shall see later in the chapter, the simplicity of this
view is probably a good indication of the depth of our ignorance about glial
function. However, we still are confident that neurons perform the bulk of
information processing in the brain. Therefore, we will focus 90% of our
attention on 10% of brain cells: the neurons.
Neuroscience, like other fields, has a language all its own. To use this language,
you must learn the vocabulary. After you have read this chapter,
take a few minutes to review the key terms list and make sure you understand
the meaning of each term. Your neuroscience vocabulary will grow
as you work your way through the book.
To study the structure of brain cells, scientists have had to overcome several
obstacles. The first was the small size. Most cells are in the range of
0.01–0.05 mm in diameter. The tip of an unsharpened pencil lead is about
2 mm across; neurons are 40–200 times smaller. (For a review of the metric
system, see Table 2.1.) This size is at or beyond the limit of what can be
seen by the naked eye. Therefore, progress in cellular neuroscience was not
possible before the development of the compound microscope in the late
seventeenth century. Even then, obstacles remained. To observe brain tissue
using a microscope, it was necessary to make very thin slices, ideally not
much thicker than the diameter of the cells. However, brain tissue has a
consistency like a bowl of Jello: not firm enough to make thin slices. Thus,
the study of the anatomy of brain cells had to await the development of a
method to harden the tissue without disturbing its structure and an instrument
that could produce very thin slices. Early in the nineteenth century,
scientists discovered how to harden, or “fix,” tissues by immersing them in
formaldehyde, and they developed a special device called a microtome to
make very thin slices.
These technical advances spawned the field of histology, the microscopic
study of the structure of tissues. But scientists studying brain structure
faced yet another obstacle. Freshly prepared brain has a uniform,
cream-colored appearance under the microscope; the tissue has no differences
in pigmentation to enable histologists to resolve individual cells.
Thus, the final breakthrough in neurohistology was the introduction of
stains that could selectively color some, but not all, parts of the cells in
brain tissue.
One stain, still used today, was introduced by the German neurologist
Franz Nissl in the late nineteenth century. Nissl showed that a class of basic
dyes would stain the nuclei of all cells and also stain clumps of material
surrounding the nuclei of neurons (Figure 2.1). These clumps are called
Nissl bodies, and the stain is known as the Nissl stain. The Nissl stain is extremely
useful for two reasons. First, it distinguishes neurons and glia from
one another. Second, it enables histologists to study the arrangement, or
cytoarchitecture, of neurons in different parts of the brain. (The prefix
cyto- is from the Greek word for “cell.”) The study of cytoarchitecture led
to the realization that the brain consists of many specialized regions. We
now know that each region performs a different function.
The Nissl stain, however, does not tell the whole story. A Nissl-stained neuron
looks like little more than a lump of protoplasm containing a nucleus.
Neurons are much more than that, but how much more was not recognized
until the publication of the work of Italian histologist Camillo Golgi
(Figure 2.2). In 1873, Golgi discovered that by soaking brain tissue in a silver
chromate solution, now called the Golgi stain, a small percentage of
neurons became darkly colored in their entirety (Figure 2.3). This revealed
that the neuronal cell body, the region of the neuron around the nucleus
that is shown with the Nissl stain, is actually only a small fraction of the
total structure of the neuron. Notice in Figures 2.1 and 2.3 how different
histological stains can provide strikingly different views of the same tissue.
Today, neurohistology remains an active field in neuroscience, along with
its credo: “The gain in brain is mainly in the stain.”
The Golgi stain shows that neurons have at least two distinguishable
parts: a central region that contains the cell nucleus, and numerous thin
tubes that radiate away from the central region. The swollen region containing
the cell nucleus has several names that are used interchangeably:
cell body, soma (plural: somata), and perikaryon (plural: perikarya). The
thin tubes that radiate away from the soma are called neurites and are of
two types: axons and dendrites (Figure 2.4).
The cell body usually gives rise to a single axon. The axon is of uniform
diameter throughout its length, and if it branches, the branches generally
extend at right angles. Because axons can travel over great distances in the
body (a meter or more), it was immediately recognized by the histologists
of the day that axons must act like “wires” that carry the output of the
neurons. Dendrites, on the other hand, rarely extend more than 2 mm in length. Many dendrites extend from the cell body and generally taper to a
fine point. Early histologists recognized that because dendrites come in
contact with many axons, they must act as the antennae of the neuron to
receive incoming signals, or input.
Golgi invented the stain, but it was a Spanish contemporary of Golgi who
used it to greatest effect. Santiago Ramón y Cajal was a skilled histologist
and artist who learned about Golgi’s method in 1888 (Figure 2.5). In a
remarkable series of publications over the next 25 years, Cajal used the
Golgi stain to work out the circuitry of many regions of the brain (Figure
2.6). Ironically, Golgi and Cajal drew completely opposite conclusions about
neurons. Golgi championed the view that the neurites of different cells are
fused together to form a continuous reticulum, or network, similar to the
arteries and veins of the circulatory system. According to this reticular theory,
the brain is an exception to the cell theory, which states that the individual
cell is the elementary functional unit of all animal tissues. Cajal, on the
other hand, argued forcefully that the neurites of different neurons are not
continuous with one another and must communicate by contact, not continuity.
This idea that the neuron adhered to the cell theory came to be known as
the neuron doctrine. Although Golgi and Cajal shared the Nobel Prize in
1906, they remained rivals to the end.
The scientific evidence over the next 50 years weighed heavily in favor
of the neuron doctrine, but final proof had to wait until the development
of the electron microscope in the 1950s (Box 2.1). With the increased resolving
power of the electron microscope, it was finally possible to show
that the neurites of different neurons are not continuous with one another.
Thus, our starting point in the exploration of the brain must be the individual
neuron.
The human eye can distinguish two points only if they are
separated by more than about one-tenth of a millimeter
(100 m). Thus, we can say that 100 m is near the limit
of resolution for the unaided eye. Neurons have a diameter
of about 20 m, and neurites can measure as small as
a fraction of a micrometer. The light microscope, therefore,
was a necessary development before neuronal structure
could be studied. But this type of microscopy has a
theoretical limit imposed by the properties of microscope
lenses and visible light. With the standard light microscope,
the limit of resolution is about 0.1 m. However,
the space between neurons measures only 0.02 m (20
nm). No wonder two esteemed scientists, Golgi and Cajal,
disagreed about whether neurites were continuous
from one cell to the next.This question could not be answered
until the electron microscope was developed and
applied to biological specimens, which occurred only
within the past 60 years or so.
The electron microscope uses an electron beam instead
of light to form images, dramatically increasing the
resolving power. The limit of resolution for an electron
microscope is about 0.1 nm—a million times better than
the unaided eye. Our insights into the fine structure of
the inside of neurons—the ultrastructure—have all come
from electron microscopic examination of the brain.
Today, microscopes on the leading edge of technology
use laser beams to illuminate the tissue and computers
to create digital images (Figure A). Unlike the traditional
methods of light and electron microscopy, which require
tissue fixation, these new techniques give neuroscientists
their first chance to peer into brain tissue
that is still alive.
As we have seen, the neuron (also called a nerve cell) consists of several
parts: the soma, the dendrites, and the axon. The inside of the neuron is
separated from the outside by the limiting skin, the neuronal membrane,
which lies like a circus tent on an intricate internal scaffolding, giving each
part of the cell its special three-dimensional appearance. Let’s explore the
inside of the neuron and learn about the functions of the different parts
(Figure 2.7).
The Soma
We begin our tour at the soma, the roughly spherical central part of the
neuron. The cell body of the typical neuron is about 20 μm in diameter.
The watery fluid inside the cell, called the cytosol, is a salty, potassiumrich
solution that is separated from the outside by the neuronal membrane.
Within the soma are a number of membrane-enclosed structures called
organelles.
The cell body of the neuron contains the same organelles that are found
in all animal cells. The most important ones are the nucleus, the rough
endoplasmic reticulum, the smooth endoplasmic reticulum, the Golgi apparatus,
and the mitochondria. Everything contained within the confines
of the cell membrane, including the organelles but excluding the nucleus,
is referred to collectively as the cytoplasm.
The Nucleus. Its name derived from the Latin word for “nut,” the nucleus
of the cell is spherical, centrally located, and about 5–10 μm across. It is
contained within a double membrane called the nuclear envelope. The nuclear
envelope is perforated by pores that measure about 0.1 μm across.
Within the nucleus are chromosomes, which contain the genetic material,
DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid). Your DNA was passed on to you from
your parents, and it contains the blueprint for your entire body. The DNA
in each of your neurons is the same, and it is the same as the DNA in the
cells of your liver and kidney. What distinguishes a neuron from a liver cell
are the specific parts of the DNA that are used to assemble the cell. These
segments of DNA are called genes.
Each chromosome contains an uninterrupted double-stranded braid of
DNA, 2 nm wide. If the DNA from the 46 human chromosomes were laid
out straight, end to end, it would measure more than 2 m in length. If
we were to consider this total length of DNA as analogous to the string
of letters that makes up this book, the genes would be analogous to the
individual words. Genes can measure anywhere from 0.1 μm to several
micrometers in length.
The “reading” of the DNA is known as gene expression. The final
product of gene expression is the synthesis of molecules called proteins,
which exist in a wide variety of shapes and sizes, perform many different
functions, and bestow upon neurons virtually all of their unique characteristics.
Protein synthesis, the assembly of protein molecules, occurs in
the cytoplasm. Because the DNA never leaves the nucleus, there must be
an intermediary that carries the genetic message to the sites of protein
synthesis in the cytoplasm. This function is performed by another long
molecule called messenger ribonucleic acid, or mRNA. Messenger RNA
consists of four different nucleic acids strung together in various sequences
to form a chain. The detailed sequence of the nucleic acids in the chain represents
the information in the gene, just as the sequence of letters gives
meaning to a written word.
The process of assembling a piece of mRNA that contains the information
of a gene is called transcription, and the resulting mRNA is called the
transcript (Figure 2.8a). Protein-coding genes are flanked by stretches of
DNA that are not used to encode proteins but are important for regulating
transcription. At one end of the gene is the promoter, the region where
the RNA-synthesizing enzyme, RNA polymerase, binds to initiate transcription.
The binding of the polymerase to the promoter is tightly regulated by
other proteins called transcription factors. At the other end is a sequence
of DNA called the terminator that the RNA polymerase recognizes as the end
point for transcription.
In addition to the non-coding regions of DNA that flank the genes, there
are often additional stretches of DNA within the gene itself that cannot be
used to code for protein. These interspersed regions are called introns, and
the coding sequences are called exons. Initial transcripts contain both introns
and exons, but then, by a process called RNA splicing, the introns
are removed and the remaining exons are fused together (Figure 2.8b). In
some cases, specific exons are also removed with the introns, leaving an
“alternatively spliced” mRNA that actually encodes a different protein.
Thus, transcription of a single gene can ultimately give rise to several different
mRNAs and protein products.
Messenger RNA transcripts emerge from the nucleus via pores in the
nuclear envelope and travel to the sites of protein synthesis elsewhere in
the neuron. At these sites, a protein molecule is assembled much as the
mRNA molecule was: by linking together many small molecules into a
chain. In the case of protein, the building blocks are amino acids, of which
there are 20 different kinds. This assembling of proteins from amino acids
under the direction of the mRNA is called translation.
The scientific study of this process, which begins with the DNA of the nucleus
and ends with the synthesis of protein molecules in the cell, is known
as molecular biology. The “central dogma” of molecular biology is summarized
as follows:A new field within neuroscience is called molecular neurobiology. Molecular
neurobiologists use the information contained in the genes to determine
the structure and functions of neuronal proteins (Box 2.2).
Rough Endoplasmic Reticulum. Not far from the nucleus are enclosed
stacks of membrane dotted with dense globular structures called ribosomes,
which measure about 25 nm in diameter. The stacks are called rough
endoplasmic reticulum, or rough ER (Figure 2.9). Rough ER abounds
in neurons, far more than in glia or most other non-neuronal cells. In fact,
we have already been introduced to rough ER by another name: Nissl
bodies. This organelle is stained with the dyes that Nissl introduced 100
years ago.
Rough ER is a major site of protein synthesis in neurons. RNA transcripts
bind to the ribosomes, and the ribosomes translate the instructions contained
in the mRNA to assemble a protein molecule. Thus, ribosomes take
raw material in the form of amino acids and manufacture proteins using
the blueprint provided by the mRNA (Figure 2.10a).
Not all ribosomes are attached to the rough ER. Many are freely floating
and are called free ribosomes. Several free ribosomes may appear to be attached
by a thread; these are called polyribosomes. The thread is a single
strand of mRNA, and the associated ribosomes are working on it to make
multiple copies of the same protein.
What is the difference between proteins synthesized on the rough ER
and those synthesized on the free ribosomes? The answer appears to lie in
the intended fate of the protein molecule. If it is destined to reside within
the cytosol of the neuron, then the protein’s mRNA transcript shuns the
ribosomes of the rough ER and gravitates toward the free ribosomes.
Sequencing the human genome—the entire length of
DNA that comprises the genetic information in our
chromosomes—was a truly monumental achievement,
completed in 2003. The Human Genome Project
identifed all of the approximately 20,000 genes in
human DNA.We now live in what has been called the
“post-genomic era,” in which information about the
genes expressed in our tissues can be used to diagnose
and treat diseases. Neuroscientists are now using
this information to tackle long-standing questions
about the biological basis of neurological and psychiatric
disorders, as well as to probe deeper into the
origins of individuality.The logic goes as follows.The
brain is the product of the genes expressed in it.
Differences in gene expression between a normal
brain and a diseased brain, or a brain of unusual ability,
can be used to identify the molecular basis of the
observed symptoms or traits.
The level of gene expression is usually defined as
the number of mRNA transcripts synthesized by
different cells and tissues to direct the synthesis of
specific proteins.Thus, the analysis of gene expression
requires a method to compare the relative abundance
of various mRNAs in the brains of two groups
of humans or animals. One way to perform such a
comparison is to use DNA microarrays, which are
created by robotic machines that arrange thousands
of small spots of synthetic DNA on a microscope
slide. Each spot contains a unique DNA sequence
that will recognize and stick to a different specific
mRNA sequence.To compare the gene expression in
two brains, one begins by collecting a sample of
mRNAs from each brain. The mRNA of one brain is
labeled with a chemical tag that fluoresces green, and
the mRNA of the other brain is labeled with a tag
that fluoresces red. These samples are then applied
to the microarray. Highly expressed genes will
produce brightly fluorescent spots, and differences in
the relative gene expression between the brains will
be revealed by differences in the color of the
fluorescence (Figure A).

However, if the protein is destined to be inserted into the membrane of the
cell or an organelle, then it is synthesized on the rough ER. As the protein
is being assembled, it is threaded back and forth through the membrane of
the rough ER, where it is trapped (Figure 2.10b). It is not surprising that
neurons are so well endowed with rough ER, because, as we shall see in
later chapters, special membrane proteins are what give these cells their
remarkable information-processing abilities.
Smooth Endoplasmic Reticulum and the Golgi Apparatus. The remainder
of the cytosol of the soma is crowded with stacks of membranous
organelles that look a lot like rough ER without the ribosomes, so much so
that one type is called smooth endoplasmic reticulum, or smooth ER.
Smooth ER is actually quite heterogeneous and performs different functions
in different locations. Some smooth ER is continuous with rough ER
and is believed to be a site where the proteins that jut out from the membrane
are carefully folded, giving them their three-dimensional structure.
Other types of smooth ER play no direct role in the processing of protein
molecules but instead regulate the internal concentrations of substances
such as calcium. (This organelle is particularly prominent in muscle cells,
where it is called sarcoplasmic reticulum, as we will see in Chapter 13.)
The stack of membrane-enclosed disks in the soma that lies farthest from
the nucleus is the Golgi apparatus, first described in 1898 by Camillo
Golgi (Figure 2.11). This is a site of extensive “post-translational” chemical
processing of proteins. One important function of the Golgi apparatus is
believed to be the sorting of certain proteins that are destined for delivery
to different parts of the neuron, such as the axon and the dendrites.
The Mitochondrion. Another very abundant organelle in the soma is the
mitochondrion (plural: mitochondria). In neurons, these sausage-shaped
structures measure about 1 μm in length. Within the enclosure of their
outer membrane are multiple folds of inner membrane called cristae (singular:
crista). Between the cristae is an inner space called matrix (Figure 2.12a).
Mitochondria are the site of cellular respiration (Figure 2.12b). When a
mitochondrion “inhales,” it pulls inside pyruvic acid (derived from sugars
and digested proteins and fats) and oxygen, both of which are floating in the
cytosol. Within the inner compartment of the mitochondrion, pyruvic acid
enters into a complex series of biochemical reactions called the Krebs cycle,
named after the German-British scientist Hans Krebs, who first proposed it
in 1937. The biochemical products of the Krebs cycle provide energy that,
in another series of reactions within the cristae (called the electron-transport
chain), results in the addition of phosphate to adenosine diphosphate
(ADP), yielding adenosine triphosphate (ATP), the cell’s energy source.
When the mitochondrion “exhales,” 17 ATP molecules are released for
every molecule of pyruvic acid that had been taken in.
ATP is the energy currency of the cell. The chemical energy stored in ATP is
used to fuel most of the biochemical reactions of the neuron. For example,
as we shall see in Chapter 3, special proteins in the neuronal membrane
use the energy released by the breakdown of ATP into ADP to pump certain
substances across the membrane to establish concentration differences
between the inside and the outside of the neuron.
The neuronal membrane serves as a barrier to enclose the cytoplasm inside
the neuron and to exclude certain substances that float in the fluid that bathes
the neuron. The membrane is about 5 nm thick and is studded with proteins.
As mentioned earlier, some of the membrane-associated proteins pump substances
from the inside to the outside. Others form pores that regulate which
substances can gain access to the inside of the neuron. An important characteristic
of neurons is that the protein composition of the membrane varies
depending on whether it is in the soma, the dendrites, or the axon.
The function of neurons cannot be understood without understanding the structure
and function of the membrane and its associated proteins. In fact, this topic
is so important that we’ll spend a good deal of the next four chapters looking
at how the membrane endows neurons with the remarkable ability to
transfer electrical signals throughout the brain and body.
Earlier, we compared the neuronal membrane to a circus tent that was draped
on an internal scaffolding. This scaffolding is called the cytoskeleton, and
it gives the neuron its characteristic shape. The “bones” of the cytoskeleton
are the microtubules, microfilaments, and neurofilaments (Figure 2.13). By
drawing an analogy with a scaffolding, we do not mean that the cytoskeleton
is static. On the contrary, elements of the cytoskeleton are dynamically
regulated and are very likely in continual motion. Your neurons are probably
squirming around in your head even as you read this sentence.
Microtubules. Measuring 20 nm in diameter, microtubules are big and
run longitudinally down neurites. A microtubule appears as a straight,
thick-walled hollow pipe. The wall of the pipe is composed of smaller
strands that are braided like rope around the hollow core. Each of the
smaller strands consists of the protein tubulin. A single tubulin molecule is
small and globular; the strand consists of tubulins stuck together like pearls
on a string. The process of joining small proteins to form a long strand is
called polymerization; the resulting strand is called a polymer. Polymerization
and depolymerization of microtubules and, therefore, of neuronal shape
can be regulated by various signals within the neuron.
One class of proteins that participate in the regulation of microtubule assembly
and function are microtubule-associated proteins, or MAPs. Among
other functions (many of which are unknown), MAPs anchor the microtubules
to one another and to other parts of the neuron. Pathological
changes in an axonal MAP, called tau, have been implicated in the dementia
that accompanies Alzheimer’s disease (Box 2.3).
Neurites are the most remarkable structural feature of a
neuron. Their elaborate branching patterns, critical for
information processing, reflect the organization of the
underlying cytoskeleton. It is therefore no surprise that
a devastating loss of brain function can result when the
cytoskeleton of neurons is disrupted. An example is
Alzheimer’s disease, which is characterized by the disruption
of the cytoskeleton of neurons in the cerebral cortex,
a region of the brain crucial for cognitive function.
This disorder and its underlying brain pathology were
first described in 1907 by the German physician A.
Alzheimer in a paper titled “A Characteristic Disease of
the Cerebral Cortex.” Below are excerpts from the English
translation.
One of the first disease symptoms of a 51-year-old
woman was a strong feeling of jealousy toward her
husband. Very soon she showed rapidly increasing
memory impairments; she could not find her way about
her home, she dragged objects to and fro, hid herself,
or sometimes thought that people were out to kill her,
then she would start to scream loudly.
During institutionalization her gestures showed a
complete helplessness. She was disoriented as to time
and place. From time to time she would state that she
did not understand anything, that she felt confused and
totally lost. Sometimes she considered the coming of
the doctor as an official visit and apologized for not
having finished her work, but other times she would
start to yell in the fear that the doctor wanted to operate
on her; or there were times that she would send
him away in complete indignation, uttering phrases that
indicated her fear that the doctor wanted to damage
her woman’s honor. From time to time she was completely
delirious, dragging her blankets and sheets to
and fro, calling for her husband and daughter, and seeming
to have auditory hallucinations. Often she would
scream for hours and hours in a horrible voice.
Mental regression advanced quite steadily.After four
and a half years of illness the patient died. She was
completely apathetic in the end, and was confined to
bed in a fetal position. (Bick et al., 1987, pp. 1–2.)
Following her death, Alzheimer examined the woman’s
brain under the microscope. He made particular note of
changes in the “neurofibrils,” elements of the cytoskeleton
that are stained by a silver solution.
The Bielschowsky silver preparation showed very
characteristic changes in the neurofibrils. However,
inside an apparently normal-looking cell, one or more
single fibers could be observed that became prominent
through their striking thickness and specific impregnability.
At a more advanced stage,many fibrils arranged
parallel showed the same changes. Then they accumulated
forming dense bundles and gradually advanced to
the surface of the cell. Eventually, the nucleus and cytoplasm
disappeared, and only a tangled bundle of fibrils
indicated the site where once the neuron had been
located.
As these fibrils can be stained with dyes different
from the normal neurofibrils, a chemical transformation
of the fibril substance must have taken place. This
might be the reason why the fibrils survived the destruction
of the cell. It seems that the transformation
of the fibrils goes hand in hand with the storage of an
as yet not closely examined pathological product of
the metabolism in the neuron. About one-quarter to
one-third of all the neurons of the cerebral cortex
showed such alterations. Numerous neurons, especially
in the upper cell layers, had totally disappeared. (Bick
et al., 1987, pp. 2–3.)
The severity of the dementia in Alzheimer’s disease is
well correlated with the number and distribution of what
are now commonly known as neurofibrillary tangles, the
“tombstones” of dead and dying neurons (Figure A). Indeed,
as Alzheimer speculated, tangle formation in the
cerebral cortex very likely causes the symptoms of the
disease. Electron microscopy reveals that the major
components of the tangles are paired helical filaments, long
fibrous proteins braided together like strands of a rope
(Figure B). It is now understood that these filaments
consist of the microtubule-associated protein tau.
Tau normally functions as a bridge between the microtubules
in axons, ensuring that they run straight and parallel to one another. In Alzheimer’s disease, the tau detaches
from the microtubules and accumulates in the
soma. This disruption of the cytoskeleton causes the
axons to wither, thus impeding the normal flow of information
in the affected neurons.
What causes the changes in tau? Attention is focused
on another protein that accumulates in the brain of
Alzheimer’s patients, called amyloid.The field of Alzheimer’s
disease research moves very fast, but the consensus today
is that the abnormal secretion of amyloid by neurons is
the first step in the process that leads to neurofibrillary
tangle formation and dementia. Current hope for therapeutic
intervention is focused on strategies to reduce the
depositions of amyloid in the brain.The need for effective
therapy is urgent: In the United States alone, more than 4
million people are afflicted with this tragic disease.
Microfilaments. Measuring only 5 nm in diameter, microfilaments are
about the same thickness as the cell membrane. Found throughout the
neuron, they are particularly numerous in the neurites. Microfilaments are
braids of two thin strands, and the strands are polymers of the protein actin.
Actin is one of the most abundant proteins in cells of all types, including
neurons, and is believed to play a role in changing cell shape. Indeed, as
we shall see in Chapter 13, actin filaments are critically involved in the
mechanism of muscle contraction.
Like microtubules, actin microfilaments are constantly undergoing assembly
and disassembly, and this process is regulated by signals in the
neuron. Besides running longitudinally down the core of the neurites
like microtubules, microfilaments are also closely associated with the
membrane. They are anchored to the membrane by attachments with a
meshwork of fibrous proteins that line the inside of the membrane like
a spider web.
Neurofilaments. With a diameter of 10 nm, neurofilaments are intermediate
in size between microtubules and microfilaments. They exist in
all cells of the body as intermediate filaments; only in neurons are they
called neurofilaments. The difference in name actually does reflect subtle
differences in structure from one tissue to the next. An example of an
intermediate filament from another tissue is keratin, which, when bundled
together, makes up hair.
Of the types of fibrous structure we have discussed, neurofilaments most
closely resemble the bones and ligaments of the skeleton. A neurofilament
consists of multiple subunits (building blocks) that are organized like a
chain of sausages. The internal structure of each subunit consists of three
protein strands woven together. Unlike microfilaments and microtubules,
these strands consist of individual long protein molecules, each of which is
coiled in a tight, springlike configuration. This structure makes neurofilaments
mechanically very strong.
The Axon
So far, we’ve explored the soma, organelles, membrane, and cytoskeleton.
However, none of these structures is unique to neurons; they are found in
all the cells in our body. Now we encounter the axon, a structure found
only in neurons that is highly specialized for the transfer of information
over distances in the nervous system.
The axon begins with a region called the axon hillock, which tapers to
form the initial segment of the axon proper (Figure 2.14). Two noteworthy
features distinguish the axon from the soma:
1. No rough ER extends into the axon, and there are few, if any, free ribosomes.
2. The protein composition of the axon membrane is fundamentally different
from that of the soma membrane.
These structural differences translate into functional distinctions. Because
there are no ribosomes, there is no protein synthesis in the axon. This
means that all proteins in the axon must originate in the soma. And it is
the different proteins in the axonal membrane that enable it to serve as the
“telegraph wire” that sends information over great distances.
Axons may extend from less than a millimeter to over a meter long.
Axons often branch, and these branches are called axon collaterals. Occasionally,
an axon collateral will return to communicate with the same cell
that gave rise to the axon or with the dendrites of neighboring cells. These
axon branches are called recurrent collaterals.
The diameter of an axon is variable, ranging from less than 1 mm to about
25 mm in humans and to as large as 1 mm in the squid. This variation in axon
size is important. As will be explained in Chapter 4, the speed of the electrical
signal that sweeps down the axon—the nerve impulse—varies depending on
axonal diameter. The thicker the axon, the faster the impulse travels.
The Axon Terminal. All axons have a beginning (the axon hillock), a
middle (the axon proper), and an end. The end is called the axon terminal
or terminal bouton (French for “button”), reflecting the fact that it
usually appears as a swollen disk (Figure 2.15). The terminal is a site where
the axon comes in contact with other neurons (or other cells) and passes
information on to them. This point of contact is called the synapse, a word
derived from the Greek, meaning “to fasten together.” Sometimes axons
have many branches at their ends, and each branch forms a synapse on
dendrites or cell bodies in the same region. These branches are collectively
called the terminal arbor. Sometimes axons form synapses at swollen
regions along their length and then continue on to terminate elsewhere.
Such swellings are called boutons en passant (“buttons in passing”). In either
case, when a neuron makes synaptic contact with another cell, it is said to
innervate that cell, or to provide innervation.
The cytoplasm of the axon terminal differs from that of the axon in
several ways:
The Synapse. Although Chapters 5 and 6 are devoted entirely to how
information is transferred from one neuron to another at the synapse, we
provide a preview here. The synapse has two sides: presynaptic and postsynaptic
(see Figure 2.15). These names indicate the usual direction of information
flow, which is from “pre” to “post.” The presynaptic side generally
consists of an axon terminal, while the postsynaptic side may be the
dendrite or soma of another neuron. The space between the presynaptic
and postsynaptic membranes is called the synaptic cleft. The transfer of
information at the synapse from one neuron to another is called synaptic
transmission.
At most synapses, information in the form of electrical impulses traveling
down the axon is converted in the terminal into a chemical signal that
crosses the synaptic cleft. On the postsynaptic membrane, this chemical signal
is converted again into an electrical one. The chemical signal is called
a neurotransmitter, and it is stored in and released from the synaptic
vesicles within the terminal. As we will see, different neurotransmitters are
used by different types of neurons.
This electrical-to-chemical-to-electrical transformation of information
makes possible many of the brain’s computational abilities. Modification of
this process is involved in memory and learning, and synaptic transmission
dysfunction accounts for certain mental disorders. The synapse is also the
site of action for many toxins and for most psychoactive drugs.
Axoplasmic Transport. As mentioned, one feature of the cytoplasm of
axons, including the terminal, is the absence of ribosomes. Because ribosomes
are the protein factories of the cell, their absence means that the proteins
of the axon must be synthesized in the soma and then shipped down
the axon. Indeed, in the mid-nineteenth century, English physiologist Augustus
Waller showed that axons cannot be sustained when separated from
their parent cell body. The degeneration of axons that occurs when they
are cut is now called Wallerian degeneration. Because it can be detected with
certain staining methods, Wallerian degeneration is one way to trace axonal
connections in the brain.
Wallerian degeneration occurs because the normal flow of materials from
the soma to the axon terminal is interrupted. This movement of material
down the axon is called axoplasmic transport, first demonstrated directly
by the experiments of American neurobiologist Paul Weiss and his colleagues
in the 1940s. They found that if they tied a thread around an axon,
material accumulated on the side of the axon closest to the soma. When
the knot was untied, the accumulated material continued down the axon
at a rate of 1–10 mm per day.
This was a remarkable discovery, but it is not the whole story. If all
material moved down the axon by this transport mechanism alone, it
would not reach the ends of the longest axons for at least half a year—too
long a wait to feed hungry synapses. In the late 1960s, methods were
developed to track the movements of protein molecules down the axon
into the terminal. These methods entailed injecting the somata of neurons
with radioactive amino acids. Recall that amino acids are the building
blocks of proteins. The “hot” amino acids were assembled into proteins, and
the arrival of radioactive proteins in the axon terminal was measured to
calculate the rate of transport. Bernice Grafstein of Rockefeller University
discovered that this fast axoplasmic transport (so named to distinguish it from
slow axoplasmic transport described by Weiss) occurred at a rate as high as
1000 mm per day.
Much is now known about how axoplasmic transport works. Material is
enclosed within vesicles, which then “walk down” the microtubules of the axon. The “legs” are provided by a protein called kinesin, and the process is
fueled by ATP (Figure 2.16). Kinesin moves material only from the soma to
the terminal. All movement of material in this direction is called anterograde
transport.
In addition to anterograde transport, there is a mechanism for the movement
of material up the axon from the terminal to the soma. This process
is believed to provide signals to the soma about changes in the metabolic
needs of the axon terminal. Movement in this direction, from terminal to
soma, is called retrograde transport. The molecular mechanism is similar
to anterograde transport, except the “legs” for retrograde transport are
provided by a different protein, dynein. Both anterograde and retrograde
transport mechanisms have been exploited by neuroscientists to trace connections
in the brain (Box 2.4).
The term dendrite is derived from the Greek for “tree,” reflecting the fact that
these neurites resemble the branches of a tree as they extend from the soma.
The dendrites of a single neuron are collectively called a dendritic tree;
each branch of the tree is called a dendritic branch. The wide variety of shapes
and sizes of dendritic trees are used to classify different groups of neurons.
Because dendrites function as the antennae of the neuron, they are
covered with thousands of synapses (Figure 2.17). The dendritic membrane
under the synapse (the postsynaptic membrane) has many specialized protein
molecules called receptors that detect the neurotransmitters in the
synaptic cleft.
Fast anterograde transport of proteins in axons was
shown by injecting the soma with radioactive amino acids.
The success of this method immediately suggested a way
to trace connections in the brain. For example, to determine
where neurons in the eye send their axons, the eye
was injected with radioactive proline, an amino acid. The
proline was incorporated into proteins in the somata that
were then transported to the axon terminals. By use of a
technique called autoradiography, the location of radioactive
axon terminals could be detected, thereby revealing the
extent of the connection between the eye and the brain.
Researchers subsequently discovered that retrograde
transport could also be exploited to work out connections
in the brain. Strangely enough, the enzyme horseradish
peroxidase (HRP) is selectively taken up by axon
terminals and then transported retrogradely to the soma.
A chemical reaction can then be initiated to visualize the
location of the HRP in slices of brain tissue.This method
is commonly used to trace connections in the brain (Figure
A).
Some viruses also exploit retrograde transport to infect
neurons. For example, the oral type of herpesvirus
enters axon terminals in the lips and mouth and is then
transported back to the parent cell bodies. Here the virus
usually remains dormant until physical or emotional stress
occurs (as on a first date), at which time it replicates and
returns to the nerve ending, causing a painful cold sore.
Similarly, the rabies virus enters the nervous system by
retrograde transport through axons in the skin. However,
once inside the soma, the virus wastes no time in replicating
madly, killing its neuronal host. The virus is then
taken up by other neurons within the nervous system,
and the process repeats itself again and again, usually until
the victim dies.
The dendrites of some neurons are covered with specialized structures
called dendritic spines that receive some types of synaptic input. Spines
look like little punching bags that hang off the dendrite (Figure 2.18). The
unusual morphology of spines has fascinated neuroscientists ever since
their discovery by Cajal. They are believed to isolate various chemical
reactions that are triggered by some types of synaptic activation. Spine
structure is sensitive to the type and amount of synaptic activity. Unusual
changes in spines have been shown to occur in the brains of individuals
with cognitive impairments (Box 2.5). William Greenough of the University
of Illinois at Urbana discovered that spine number is also very sensitive
to the quality of the environment experienced during early development
and in adulthood (Box 2.6).
The elaborate architecture of a neuron’s dendritic tree is
a good reflection of the complexity of its synaptic connections
with other neurons. Brain function depends on these
highly precise synaptic connections, which are formed
during the fetal period and are refined during infancy and
early childhood. Not surprisingly, this very complex developmental
process is vulnerable to disruption. Mental retardation
is said to have occurred if a disruption of brain
development results in subaverage cognitive functioning
that impairs adaptive behavior.
The use of standardized tests indicates that intelligence
in the general population is distributed along a
bell-shaped (Gaussian) curve. By convention, the mean intelligence
quotient (IQ) is set to be 100. About twothirds
of the total population falls within 15 points (one
standard deviation) of the mean, and 95% of the population
falls within 30 points (two standard deviations). People
with intelligence scores below 70 are considered to
be mentally retarded if the cognitive impairment affects
the person’s ability to adapt his or her behavior to the
setting in which he or she lives. Some 2–3% of humans
fit this description.
Mental retardation has many causes. The most severe
forms are associated with genetic disorders. An example
is a condition called phenylketonuria (PKU). The basic abnormality
is a deficit in the liver enzyme that metabolizes
the dietary amino acid phenylalanine. Infants born with
PKU have an abnormally high level of the amino acid in
the blood and brain. If the condition goes untreated, brain
growth is stunted and severe mental retardation results.
Another example is Down syndrome, which occurs when the
fetus has an extra copy of chromosome 21, thus disrupting
normal gene expression during brain development.
A second known cause of mental retardation is accidents
during pregnancy and childbirth. Examples are
maternal infections with German measles (rubella) and
asphyxia during childbirth. A third cause of mental retardation
is poor nutrition during pregnancy. An example
is fetal alcohol syndrome, a constellation of developmental
abnormalities that occur in children born to
alcoholic mothers. A fourth cause, thought to account
for the majority of cases, is environmental impoverishment—
the lack of good nutrition, socialization, and sensory
stimulation—during infancy.
While some forms of mental retardation have very
clear physical correlates (e.g., stunted growth; abnormalities
in the structure of the head, hands, and body), most
cases have only behavioral manifestations. The brains of
these individuals appear grossly normal. How, then, do
we account for the profound cognitive impairment? An
important clue came in the 1970s from the research of
Miguel Marin-Padilla, working at Dartmouth College, and
Dominick Purpura, working at the Albert Einstein College
of Medicine in New York City. Using the Golgi stain, they
studied the brains of retarded children and discovered
remarkable changes in dendritic structure. The dendrites
of retarded children had many fewer dendritic spines, and
the spines that they did have were unusually long and thin
(Figure A).The extent of the spine changes was well correlated
with the degree of mental retardation.
Dendritic spines are an important target of synaptic
input. Purpura pointed out that the dendritic spines of
mentally retarded children resemble those of the normal
human fetus. He suggested that mental retardation reflects
the failure of normal circuits to form in the brain.
In the 3 decades since this seminal work was published,
it has been established that normal synaptic development,
including maturation of the dendritic spines, depends critically
on the environment during infancy and early childhood.
An impoverished environment during an early “critical
period” of development can lead to profound changes
in the circuits of the brain. However, there is some good
news. Many of the deprivation-induced changes in the
brain can be reversed if intervention occurs early enough.
In Chapter 22, we will take a closer look at the role of
experience in brain development.
It is a frequent misconception that scientific research results
in simple, clear answers to questions. The truth is
that almost every answer results in a whole battery of
new questions. But the research serves to increase our
understanding so that we know how to frame the new
questions, and try to tackle them.
When we first saw polyribosomes below synapses in
dendritic spines, we asked: “What are they doing away
from the soma, where mRNA is usually translated?” An
exciting possibility was that they might make special
proteins that were involved in remodeling the synapse.
I had seen that in animals exposed to enriched environments,
new spines were made and other spines were
remodeled from small to larger structures with—presumably—
more efficient signaling. Could these synaptic
polyribosomes be manufacturing crucial proteins that
could account for the improved efficiency? Some kind
of “memory proteins”?
I recalled a paper by Hollingsworth, in which he figured
out a way to shear off synapses on spines, a preparation
called synaptoneurosomes (Figure A), and study them biochemically.
My colleague Ivan Jeanne Weiler and I attempted
to isolate the mRNA in synaptoneurosomes to
identify the crucial “memory proteins.” Repeated failures,
due apparently to mRNA degradation, both frustrated
and slowed us. But eventually we found that some of the
mRNA was being incorporated into polyribosomes, meaning
that protein was being synthesized.We then discovered
that this protein synthesis was strongly increased
when we stimulated the synaptoneurosomes with the
neurotransmitter glutamate, and we were able to identify
the glutamate receptor that was responsible.We now
thought we were poised to isolate the “memory proteins”
from the newly assembled polyribosomes.
We set up to harvest polyribosomes from stimulated and
unstimulated synaptoneurosomes to see which mRNAs
were translated in response to glutamate. About this time,
Jim Eberwine (University of Pennsylvania) told us about the
mRNAs he had isolated from single dendrites.We looked
for their translation in our new system, and the first one
that was increased by stimulation turned out to be the
fragile X mental retardation protein (FMRP). This has led
us to study brain abnormalities in fragile X syndrome, the
largest cause of inherited mental retardation.
Do we now, at last, have a “memory protein”? Not yet,
because FMRP is not a structural or receptor protein, but
a protein that binds mRNA. It seems to orchestrate the
translation of an impressive array of other mRNAs, few
of which, at first glance, look like “memory proteins.” But,
if FMRP is a key to how the synapse changes itself, then
we think we are still on the right track to understand
synaptic remodeling. Indeed, people with fragile X syndrome
have immature-appearing synapses.
So we have been wrong a lot of the time, and frustrated
on a near-weekly basis. Nature is full of surprises,
but we have increased our understanding of synaptic protein
synthesis. Indeed, we are now asking new questions
that may help us understand and possibly treat the leading
inherited form of mental retardation. It was worth the
effort.
For the most part, the cytoplasm of dendrites resembles that of axons. It
is filled with cytoskeletal elements and mitochondria. One interesting difference
was discovered by neuroscientist Oswald Steward. He found that
polyribosomes can be observed in dendrites, often right under spines. Steward’s
research suggests that synaptic transmission can actually direct local
protein synthesis in some neurons. In Chapter 25, we will see that synaptic
regulation of protein synthesis is crucial for information storage by the brain.
It is unlikely that we can ever hope to understand how each of the hundred
billion neurons in the nervous system uniquely contributes to the
function of the brain. But what if we could show that all the neurons in
the brain can be divided into a small number of categories, and that within
each category, all neurons function identically? The complexity of the problem
might then be reduced to understanding the unique contribution of
each category, rather than each cell. It is with this hope that neuroscientists
have devised schemes for classifying neurons.
Neurons can be classified according to the total number of neurites (axons
and dendrites) that extend from the soma (Figure 2.19). A neuron that has
a single neurite is said to be unipolar. If there are two neurites, the cell is
bipolar, and if there are three or more, the cell is multipolar. Most neurons
in the brain are multipolar.
Dendritic trees can vary widely from one type of neuron to another. Some
have inspired elegant names like “double bouquet cells.” Others have less
interesting names, such as “alpha cells.” Classification is often unique to a
particular part of the brain. For example, in the cerebral cortex (the structure
that lies just under the surface of the cerebrum), there are two broad
classes: stellate cells (star-shaped) and pyramidal cells (pyramid-shaped)
(Figure 2.20).
Another simple way to classify neurons is according to whether their
dendrites have spines. Those that do are called spiny, and those that do
not are called aspinous. These dendritic classification schemes can overlap.
For example, in the cerebral cortex, all pyramidal cells are spiny. Stellate
cells, on the other hand, can be either spiny or aspinous.
Information is delivered to the nervous system by neurons that have neurites
in the sensory surfaces of the body, such as the skin and the retina of
the eye. Cells with these connections are called primary sensory neurons.
Other neurons have axons that form synapses with the muscles and command
movements; these are called motor neurons. But most neurons in
the nervous system form connections only with other neurons. According
to this classification scheme, these cells are all called interneurons.
Some neurons have long axons that extend from one part of the brain to
the other; these are called Golgi type I neurons, or projection neurons. Other
neurons have short axons that do not extend beyond the vicinity of the cell
body; these are called Golgi type II neurons, or local circuit neurons. In the
cerebral cortex, for example, pyramidal cells usually have long axons that
extend to other parts of the brain and are therefore Golgi type I neurons.
In contrast, stellate cells have axons that never extend beyond the cerebral
cortex and are therefore Golgi type II neurons.
The classification schemes presented so far are based on the morphology of
neurons as revealed by a Golgi stain. Newer methods that enable neuroscientists
to identify which neurons contain specific neurotransmitters have
resulted in a scheme for classifying neurons based on their chemistry. For
example, the motor neurons that command voluntary movements all release
the neurotransmitter acetylcholine at their synapses. These cells are therefore
also classified as cholinergic, meaning that they use this particular neurotransmitter.
Collections of cells that use a common neurotransmitter make
up the brain’s neurotransmitter systems (see Chapters 6 and 15).
We have devoted most of our attention in this chapter to the neurons.
While this decision is justified by the state of current knowledge, some neuroscientists
consider glia to be the “sleeping giants” of neuroscience. One
day, they suppose, it will be shown that glia contribute much more importantly
to information processing in the brain than is currently appreciated.
At present, however, the evidence indicates that glia contribute to brain
function mainly by supporting neuronal functions. Although their role may
be subordinate, without glia, the brain could not function properly.
The most numerous glia in the brain are called astrocytes (Figure 2.21).
These cells fill the spaces between neurons. The space that remains between
the neurons and the astrocytes in the brain measures only about 20 nm
wide. Consequently, astrocytes probably influence whether a neurite can
grow or retract. And when we speak of fluid “bathing” neurons in the brain,
it is more like a soaking from a hose than immersion in a swimming pool.
An essential role of astrocytes is regulating the chemical content of this
extracellular space. For example, astrocytes envelop synaptic junctions in the
brain, thereby restricting the spread of neurotransmitter molecules that
have been released. Astrocytes also have special proteins in their membranes
that actively remove many neurotransmitters from the synaptic
cleft. A recent and unexpected discovery is that astrocytic membranes also
possess neurotransmitter receptors that, like the receptors on neurons, can
trigger electrical and biochemical events inside the glial cell. Besides regulating
neurotransmitters, astrocytes also tightly control the extracellular
concentration of several substances that have the potential to interfere with
proper neuronal function. For example, astrocytes regulate the concentration
of potassium ions in the extracellular fluid.
Unlike astrocytes, the primary function of oligodendroglial and Schwann
cells is clear. These glia provide layers of membrane that insulate axons.
Boston University anatomist Alan Peters, a pioneer in the electron microscopic
study of the nervous system, showed that this wrapping, called
myelin, spirals around axons in the brain (Figure 2.22). Because the axon
fits inside the spiral wrapping like a sword in its scabbard, the name myelin
sheath describes the entire covering. The sheath is interrupted periodically,
leaving a short length where the axonal membrane is exposed. This region
is called a node of Ranvier (Figure 2.23).
We will see in Chapter 4 that myelin serves to speed the propagation of
nerve impulses down the axon. Oligodendroglia and Schwann cells differ
in their location and some other characteristics. For example, oligodendroglia
are found only in the central nervous system (brain and spinal
cord), while Schwann cells are found only in the peripheral nervous system
(parts outside the skull and vertebral column). Another difference is
that one oligodendroglial cell will contribute myelin to several axons, while
each Schwann cell myelinates only a single axon.
Even if we eliminated every neuron, every astrocyte, and every oligodendroglial
cell, other cells would still remain in the brain. For the sake of completeness,
we must mention these other cells. First, special cells called
ependymal cells provide the lining of fluid-filled ventricles within the
brain, and they also play a role in directing cell migration during brain development.
Second, a class of cells called microglia function as phagocytes
to remove debris left by dead or degenerating neurons and glia. Finally, the
vasculature of the brain—arteries, veins, and capillaries—would still be there.
Learning about the structural characteristics of the neuron provides insight
into how neurons and their different parts work, because structure correlates
with function. For example, the absence of ribosomes in the axon
correctly predicts that proteins in the axon terminal must be provided by
the soma via axoplasmic transport. A large number of mitochondria in the
axon terminal correctly predicts a high energy demand. The elaborate
structure of the dendritic tree appears ideally suited for the receipt of incoming
information, and indeed, this is where most of the synapses are
formed with the axons of other neurons.
From the time of Nissl, it has been recognized that an important feature
of neurons is the rough ER. What does this tell us about neurons? We have
said that rough ER is a site of the synthesis of proteins destined to be inserted
into the membrane. We will now see how the various proteins in
the neuronal membrane give rise to the unique capabilities of neurons to
transmit, receive, and store information.
