Extensive synaptic connectivity is a hallmark of neural circuitry. For example,
a typical neuron in themammalian neocortex receives thousands of
synaptic inputs. Network models allow us to explore the computational
potential of such connectivity, using both analysis and simulations. As
illustrations, we study in this chapter how networks can perform the following
tasks: coordinate transformations needed in visually guided reaching,
selective ampliÞcation leading to models of simple and complex cells
in primary visual cortex, integration as a model of short-term memory,
noise reduction, input selection, gain modulation, and associative memory.
Networks that undergo oscillations are also analyzed, with application
to the olfactory bulb. Finally, we discuss network models based on
stochastic rather than deterministic dynamics, using the Boltzmann machine
as an example.
Neocortical circuits are a major focus of our discussion. In the neocortex,
which forms the convoluted outer surface of the (for example) human
brain, neurons lie in six vertical layers highly coupled within cylindrical
columns. Such columns have been suggested as basic functional units, 
and stereotypical patterns of connections both within a column and between
columns are repeated across cortex. There are three main classes
of interconnections within cortex, and in other areas of the brain as well.
Feedforward connections bring input to a given region from another re- f
gion located at an earlier stage along a particular processing pathway. Recurrent
synapses interconnect neurons within a particular region that are
considered to be at the same stage along the processing pathway. These
may include connections within a cortical column as well as connections
between both nearby and distant cortical columns within a region. Topdown
connections carry signals back from areas located at later stages.
These deÞnitions depend on the how the region being studied is speciÞed
and on the hierarchical assignment of regions along a pathway. In general,
neurons within a given region send top-down projections back to the
areas from which they receive feedforward input, and receive top-down
input from the areas to which they project feedforward output. The numbers,
though not necessarily the strengths, of feedforward and top-down
Þbers between connected regions are typically comparable, and recurrent
synapses typically outnumber feedforward or top-down inputs. We begin
this chapter by studying networks with purely feedforward input and
then study the effects of recurrent connections. The analysis of top-down
connections, for which it is more difÞcult to establish clear computational
roles, is left until chapter 10.
Themost direct way to simulate neural networks is to use themethods discussed
in chapters 5 and 6 to synaptically connect model spiking neurons.
This is a worthwhile and instructive enterprise, but it presents signiÞcant
computational, calculational, and interpretational challenges. In this chapter,
we follow a simpler approach and construct networks of neuron-like
units with outputs consisting of Þring rates rather than action potentials.
Spiking models involve dynamics over time scales ranging from channel
openings that can take less than a millisecond, to collective network processes
that may be several orders of magnitude slower. Firing-rate models
avoid the short time scale dynamics required to simulate action potentials
and thus are much easier to simulate on computers. Firing-rate models
also allow us to present analytic calculations of some aspects of network
dynamics that could not be treated in the case of spiking neurons. Finally,
spiking models tend to havemore free parameters than Þring-ratemodels,
and setting these appropriately can be difÞcult.
There are two additional arguments in favor of Þring-rate models. The
Þrst concerns the apparent stochasticity of spiking. The models discussed
in chapters 5 and 6 produce spike sequences deterministically in response
to injected current or synaptic input. Deterministic models can predict
spike sequences accurately only if all their inputs are known. This is unlikely
to be the case for the neurons in a complex network, and network
models typically include only a subset of the many different inputs to individual
neurons. Therefore, the greater apparent precision of spiking models
may not actually be realized in practice. If necessary, Þring-ratemodels
can be used to generate stochastic spike sequences from a deterministically
computed rate, using the methods discussed in chapters 1 and 2.
The second argument involves a complication with spiking models that
arises when they are used to construct simpliÞed networks. Although cortical
neurons receive many inputs, the probability of Þnding a synaptic
connection between a randomly chosen pair of neurons is actually quite
low. Capturing this feature, while retaining a high degree of connectivity
through polysynaptic pathways, requires including a large number of
neurons in a network model. A standard way of dealing with this problem
is to use a single model unit to represent the average response of several
neurons that have similar selectivities. These “averaging” units can then
be interconnected more densely than the individual neurons of the actual
network, so fewer of them are needed to build the model. If neural responses
are characterized by Þring rates, the output of the model unit is
simply the average of the Þring rates of the neurons it represents collectively.
However, if the response is a spike, it is not clear how the spikes
of the represented neurons can be averaged. The way spiking models are
typically constructed, an action potential Þred by the model unit duplicates
the effect of all the neurons it represents Þring synchronously. Not
surprisingly, such models tend to exhibit large-scale synchronization unlike
anything seen in a healthy brain.
Firing-rate models also have their limitations. They cannot account for
aspects of spike timing and spike correlations that may be important for
understanding nervous system function. Firing-rate models are restricted
to cases where the Þring of neurons in a network is uncorrelated, with little
synchronous Þring, and where precise patterns of spike timing are unimportant.
In such cases, comparisons of spiking network models with models
that use Þring-rate descriptions have shown that they produce similar
results. Nevertheless, the exploration of neural networks undoubtedly requires
the use of both Þring-rate and spiking models.
The Þring-rate models described by equations 7.6 and 7.8 differ in their
assumptions about how Þring rates respond to and track changes in the
input current to a neuron. In one case (equation 7.6), it is assumed that
Þring rates follow time-varying input currents instantaneously, without
attenuation or delay. In the other case (equation 7.8), the Þring rate is a
low-pass Þltered version of the input current. To study the relationship
between input current and Þring rate, it is useful to examine the Þring rate
of a spiking model neuron in response to a time-varying injected current,
I(t). The model used for this purpose in Þgure 7.2 is an integrate-and-Þre
neuron receiving balanced excitatory and inhibitory synaptic input along
with a current injected into the soma that is the sum of constant and oscillating
components. This model was discussed in chapter 5. The balanced
synaptic input is used to represent background input not included in the
computation of Is, and it acts as a source of noise. The noise prevents
effects, such as locking of the spiking to the oscillations of the injected current,
that would invalidate a Þring-rate description.