As in previous editions, the goal of this sixth edition
of Principles of Neural Science is to provide readers with
insight into how genes, molecules, neurons, and the
circuits they form give rise to behavior. With the exponential growth in neuroscience research over the 40 years
since the first edition of this book, an increasing challenge is to provide a comprehensive overview of the field
while remaining true to the original goal of the first
edition, which is to elevate imparting basic principles
over detailed encyclopedic knowledge.
Some of the greatest successes in brain science over
the past 75 years have been the elucidation of the cell
biological and electrophysiological functions of nerve
cells, from the initial studies of Hodgkin, Huxley, and
Katz on the action potential and synaptic transmission to our modern understanding of the genetic and
molecular biophysical bases of these fundamental processes. The first three parts of this book delineate these
remarkable achievements.
The first six chapters in Part I provide an overview
of the broad themes of neural science, including the
basic anatomical organization of the nervous system
and the genetic bases of nervous system function and
behavior. We have added a new chapter (Chapter 5) to
introduce the principles by which neurons participate
in neural circuits that perform specific computations
of behavioral relevance. We conclude by considering
how application of modern imaging techniques to the
human brain provides a bridge between neuroscience
and psychology. The next two parts of the book focus
on the basic properties of nerve cells, including the
generation and conduction of the action potential
(Part II) and the electrophysiological and molecular
mechanisms of synaptic transmission (Part III).
We then consider how the activity of neurons in
the peripheral and central nervous systems gives rise
to sensation and movement. In Part IV, we discuss the
various aspects of sensory perception, including how
information from the primary organs of sensation is
transmitted to the central nervous system and how it
Preface
is processed there by successive brain regions to generate a sensory percept. In Part V, we consider the neural
mechanisms underlying movement, beginning with
an overview of the field that is followed by a treatment
ranging from the properties of skeletal muscle fibers
to an analysis of how motor commands issued by the
spinal cord are derived from activity in motor cortex and cerebellum. We include a new treatment that
addresses how the basal ganglia regulate the selection
of motor actions and instantiate reinforcement learning (Chapter 38).
In the latter parts of the book, we turn to higherlevel cognitive processes, beginning in Part VI with a
discussion of the neural mechanisms by which subcortical areas mediate homeostatic control mechanisms, emotions, and motivation, and the influence of
these processes on cortical cognitive operations, such
as feelings, decision-making, and attention. We then
consider the development of the nervous system in
Part VII, from early embryonic differentiation and the
initial establishment of synaptic connections, to their
experience-dependent refinement, to the replacement
of neurons lost to injury or disease. Because learning
and memory can be seen as a continuation of synaptic development, we next consider memory, together
with language, and include a new chapter on decisionmaking and consciousness (Chapter 56) in Part VIII.
Finally, in Part IX, we consider the neural mechanisms
underlying diseases of the nervous system.
Since the last edition of this book, the field of
neuroscience has continued to rapidly evolve, which
is reflected in changes in this edition. The continued
development of new electrophysiological and light
microscopic–based imaging technologies has enabled
the simultaneous recording of the activity of large populations of neurons in awake behaving animals. These
large data sets have given rise to new computational
and theoretical approaches to gain insight into how
the activity of populations of neurons produce specific behaviors. Light microscopic imaging techniques 
using genetically encoded calcium sensors allow us to
record the activity of hundreds or thousands of defined
classes of neurons with subcellular resolution as an
animal engages in defined behaviors. At the same time,
the development of genetically encoded light-activated
ion channels and ion pumps (termed optogenetics) or
genetically engineered receptors activated by synthetic
ligands (termed chemogenetics or pharmacogenetics)
can be used to selectively activate or silence genetically defined populations of neurons to examine their
causal role in such behaviors. In addition to including such material in chapters throughout the book,
we introduce some of these developments in the new
Chapter 5, which considers both the new experimental technologies as well as computational principles by
which neural circuits give rise to behavior.
Over the past 20 years, there has also been an expansion of new technologies that enable noninvasive and
invasive recordings from the human brain. These studies
have narrowed the gap between neuroscience and psychology, as exemplified in the expanded discussion of
different forms of human memory in Chapter 52. Noninvasive brain imaging methods have allowed scientists
to identify brain areas in humans that are activated during cognitive acts. As discussed in a new chapter on the
brain–machine interface (Chapter 39), the implantation
of electrodes in the brains of patients permits both electrophysiological recordings and local neural stimulation,
offering the promise of restoring some function to individuals with damage to the central or peripheral nervous system.
An understanding of basic and higher-order
neural mechanisms is critical not only for our understanding of the normal function of the brain, but also
for the insights they afford into a range of inherited
and acquired neurological and psychiatric disorders.
With modern genetic sequencing, it is now clear that
inherited or spontaneous mutations in neuronally
expressed genes contribute to brain disease. At the
same time, it is also clear that environmental factors
interact with basic genetic mechanisms to influence
disease progression. We now end the book with a new
section, Part IX, which presents the neuroscientific
principles underlying disorders of the nervous system.
In previous editions, many of these chapters were dispersed throughout the book. However, we now group
these chapters in their own part based on the increasing appreciation that the underlying causes of what
appear to be separate diseases, including neurodegenerative diseases, such as Parkinson and Alzheimer
disease, and neurodevelopmental disorders, such as
schizophrenia and autism, share certain common principles. Finally, these chapters emphasize the historical
tradition of how studies of brain disease provide deep
insights into normal brain function, including memory
and consciousness.
In writing this latest edition, it is our hope and
goal that readers will emerge with an appreciation
of the achievements of modern neuroscience and the
challenges facing future generations of neuroscientists. By emphasizing how neuroscientists in the past
have devised experimental approaches to resolve
fundamental questions and controversies in the field,
we hope that this textbook will also encourage readers to think critically and not shy away from questioning received wisdom, for every hard-won truth
likely will lead to new and perhaps more profound
questions in brain science. Thus, it is our hope that
this sixth edition of Principles of Neural Science will
provide the foundation and motivation for the next
generation of neuroscientists to formulate and investigate these questions.
The capacity for movement, as many dictionaries remind us,
is a defining feature of animal life. As Sherrington, who pioneered the study of the motor system pointed out, “to move
things is all that mankind can do, for such the sole executant is muscle, whether in whispering a syllable or in felling a forest.”*
The immense repertoire of motions that humans are capable
of stems from the activity of some 640 skeletal muscles—all under
the control of the central nervous system. After processing sensory
information about the body and its surroundings, the motor centers
of the brain and spinal cord issue neural commands that effect coordinated, purposeful movements.
The task of the motor systems is the reverse of the task of the
sensory systems. Sensory processing generates an internal representation in the brain of the outside world or of the state of the body.
Motor processing begins with an internal representation: the desired
purpose of movement. Critically, however, this internal representation needs to be continuously updated by internally generated
information (efference copy) and external sensory information to
maintain accuracy as the movement unfolds.
Just as psychophysical analysis of sensory processing tells us
about the capabilities and limitations of the sensory systems, psychophysical analyses of motor performance reveal the control rules
used by the motor system.
Because many of the motor acts of daily life are unconscious,
we are often unaware of their complexity. Simply standing upright,
for example, requires continual adjustments of numerous postural
muscles in response to the vestibular signals evoked by miniscule
swaying. Walking, running, and other forms of locomotion involve
the combined action of central pattern generators, gated sensory
information, and descending commands, which together generate
the complex patterns of alternating excitation and inhibition to the
appropriate sets of muscles. Many actions, such as serving a tennis
ball or executing an arpeggio on a piano, occur far too quickly to be
shaped by sensory feedback. Instead, centers, such as the cerebellum, make use of predictive models that simulate the consequences
of the outgoing commands and allow very short latency corrections.
Motor learning provides one of the most fruitful subjects for studies
of neural plasticity.
Motor systems are organized in a functional hierarchy, with
each level concerned with a different decision. The highest and most
abstract level, likely requiring the prefrontal cortex, deals with the
purpose of a movement or series of motor actions. The next level,
which is concerned with the formation of a motor plan, involves
interactions between the posterior parietal and premotor areas of
the cerebral cortex. The premotor cortex specifies the spatiotemporal
characteristics of a movement based on sensory information from
the posterior parietal cortex about the environment and about the
position of the body in space. The lowest level of the hierarchy coordinates the spatiotemporal details of the muscle contractions needed
to execute the planned movement. This coordination is executed by
the primary motor cortex, brain stem, and spinal cord. This serial
view has heuristic value, but evidence suggests that many of these
processes can occur in parallel.
Some functions of the motor systems and their disturbance by
disease have now been described at the level of the biochemistry of
specific transmitter systems. In fact, the discovery that neurons in
the basal ganglia of parkinsonian patients are deficient in dopamine
was the first important clue that neurological disorders in the central
nervous system can result from altered chemical transmission. Neurophysiological studies have provided information as to how such
transmitters play a critical role in action selection and the reinforcement of successful movements.
Understanding the functional properties of the motor system is
not only fundamental in its own right, but it is of further importance
in helping us to understand disorders of this system and explore the
possibilities for treatment and recovery. As would be expected for
such a complex apparatus, the motor system is subject to various
malfunctions. Disruptions at different levels in the motor hierarchy
produce distinctive symptoms, including the movement-slowing
characteristic of disorders of the basal ganglia, such as Parkinson
disease, the incoordination seen with cerebellar disease, and the
spasticity and weakness typical of spinal cord damage. For this reason, the neurological examination of a patient inevitably includes
tests of reflexes, gait, and dexterity, all of which provide information
about the status of the nervous system. In addition to pharmacological therapies, the treatment of motor system disorders has been augmented by two new approaches. First, focal stimulation of the basal
ganglia has been shown to restore motility to certain patients with
Parkinson disease; such deep-brain stimulation is also being tested
in the context of other neurological and psychiatric conditions. And
second, the motor systems have become a target for the application
of neural prosthetics; neural signals are decoded and used to drive
devices that aid patients with paralysis caused by spinal cord injury
and stroke.
Understanding the normal function of
the nervous system is central to understanding dysfunction caused by disease or injury
and designing therapies. Such treatments include
pharmacological agents, surgical interventions, and,
increasingly, electronic medical devices. These medical devices fill an important gap between largely
molecularly targeted and systemic medications and
largely anatomically targeted and focal surgical
lesions.
In this chapter, we focus on medical devices that
measure or alter electrophysiological activity at the
level of populations of neurons. These devices are
referred to as brain–machine interfaces (BMIs), brain–
computer interfaces, or neural prostheses. We use the
term BMI to refer to all such devices because there
is no standard distinction among them. BMIs can
be organized into four broad categories: those that
restore lost sensory capabilities, those that restore lost
motor capabilities, those that regulate pathological
neural activity, and those that restore lost brain processing capabilities.
BMIs can help people perform “activities of daily
living,” such as feeding oneself, physically dressing
and grooming oneself, maintaining continence, and
walking. A type of BMI that we will discuss extensively
in this chapter converts electrical activity from neurons
in the brain into signals that control prosthetic devices
to help people with paralysis. By understanding how
neuroscience and neuroengineering work together to
create current BMIs, we can more clearly envision how
many neurological diseases and injuries can be treated
with medical devices.
One of the earliest and most widely used BMIs is the
cochlear implant. People with profound deafness can
benefit from restoration of even some audition. Since
the 1970s, several hundred thousand people who
have a peripheral cause of deafness that leaves the
cochlear nerve and central auditory pathways intact
have received cochlear implants. These systems have
restored considerable hearing and spoken language,
even to children with congenital deafness who have
learned to perceive speech using cochlear implants.
Cochlear implants operate by capturing sounds
with a microphone that resides outside the skin and
sending these signals to a receiver surgically implanted
under the skin near the ear. After conversion (encoding) to appropriate spatial-temporal signal patterns,
these signals electrically stimulate spiral ganglion cells
in the cochlear modiolus (Chapter 26). In turn, signals from the activated cochlear cells are transmitted
through the auditory nerve to the brain stem and higher
auditory areas where, ideally, the neural signals are
interpreted as the sounds captured by the microphone.
Another example of a BMI is a retinal prosthesis.
Blindness can be caused by diseases such as retinitis
pigmentosa, an inherited retinal degenerative disease.
At present, there is no cure and no approved medical
therapy to slow or reverse the disease. Retinal prostheses currently enable patients to recognize large letters
and locate the position of objects. They operate by capturing images with a camera and sending these signals
to a receiver positioned within the eye. After conversion to appropriate spatial-temporal patterns, these
electrical signals stimulate retinal ganglion cells in the
retina through dozens of electrodes. In turn, these cells
send their signals through the optic nerve to the thalamus and higher visual areas where, ideally, the afferent
signals are interpreted as the image captured by the
camera.
BMIs are also being developed to assist paralyzed people and amputees by restoring lost motor and communication function. This is the central topic of this
chapter. First, electrical neural activity in one or more
brain areas is measured using penetrating multielectrode arrays placed, for example, in the arm and
hand region of the primary motor cortex, dorsal and
ventral premotor cortex, and/or intraparietal cortex
(particularly the parietal reach region and medial
intraparietal area) (Figure 39–1).
Second, an arm movement is attempted but cannot
be made in the case of people with paralysis. Action
potentials and local field potentials are measured during these attempts. With 100 electrodes placed in the
primary motor cortex and another 100 in the dorsal
premotor cortex, for example, action potentials from
approximately 200 neurons and local field potentials
from 200 electrodes are measured. Local field potentials are lower-frequency signals recorded on the same
electrodes as the action potentials and believed to arise
from local synaptic currents of many neurons near
the electrode tips. Together, these neural signals contain considerable information about how the person
wishes to move her arm.
Third, the relationship between neural activity and
attempted movements is characterized. This relationship makes it possible to predict the desired movement
from new neural activity, a statistical procedure we
refer to as neural decoding. Fourth, the BMI is then operated in its normal mode where neural activity is measured in real time and desired movements are decoded
from the neural activity by a computer. The decoded
movements can be used to guide prosthetic devices,
such as a cursor on a computer screen or a robotic arm.
It is also possible to electrically stimulate muscles in
a paralyzed limb to enact the decoded movements,
a procedure known as functional electrical stimulation.
Many other prosthetic devices can be envisioned as we
increasingly interact with the world around us electronically (eg, smart phones, automobiles, and everyday objects that are embedded with electronics so that
they can send and receive data—known as the “internet
of things”).
Finally, because the person can see the prosthetic
device, she can alter her neural activity by thinking
different thoughts on a moment-by-moment basis
so as to guide the prosthetic device more accurately.
This closed-loop feedback control system can make
use of nonvisual sensory modalities as well, including delivering pressure and position information from
electronic sensors wrapped on or embedded in a prosthetic arm. Such surrogate sensory information can be
transformed into electrical stimulation patterns that
are delivered to proprioceptive and somatosensory
cortex.
The BMIs described above include motor and
communication BMIs. Motor BMIs aim to provide
natural control of a robotic limb or a paralyzed limb.
In the case of upper-limb prostheses, this involves the 
precise movement of the arm along a desired path and
with a desired speed profile. Such control is indeed
an ambitious ultimate goal, but even intermediate
steps toward this goal could improve quality of life by
restoring some lost motor function and improving the
patient’s ability to carry out “activities of daily living.”
For example, numerous people with tetraplegia could
benefit from being able to feed themselves.
Communication BMIs are designed to provide
a fast and accurate interface with a plethora of electronic devices. The ability to move a computer cursor
around an on-screen keyboard allows a patient to type
commands for computers, smart phones, voice synthesizers, smart homes, and the “internet of things.”
Ideally, communication BMIs would allow for a communication rate at which most people speak or type.
Such BMIs would benefit people with amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis (ALS), who often become “locked in”
and unable to communicate with the outside world
through any movements. Communication BMIs would
also benefit people with other neurodegenerative diseases that severely compromise the quality of movement and speech, as well as those with upper spinal
cord injury. The ability to reliably type several words
per minute is a meaningful improvement in quality of
life for many patients.
Motor and communication BMIs build on basic
neuroscientific research in voluntary movement
(Chapter 34). The design and development of BMIs have
so far depended on laboratory animal research, largely
with nonhuman primates; recently, however, pilot clinical trials with humans with paralysis have begun.
BMIs have been developed to help people with disorders involving pathological neural activity in the
brain, such as Parkinson disease and epilepsy. People
with Parkinson disease benefit by having hand and
arm tremor reduced. At present, there is no cure for
Parkinson disease, and many people become resistant
to pharmacological treatments. A deep brain stimulator (DBS) can help these people by delivering electrical
pulses to targeted areas in the brain to disrupt the aberrant neural activity.
DBS is controlled by a neurostimulator implanted
in the chest, with wires to stimulating electrodes in
deep brain nuclei (eg, the subthalamic nucleus). The
nuclei are continuously stimulated with these electrodes in order to alter the aberrant neural activity.
This method can often greatly reduce Parkinson disease–
related tremor for years. A DBS applied to different
brain areas can also help people with essential tremor,
dystonia, chronic pain, major depression, and obsessivecompulsive disorder.
Millions of people experiencing epileptic seizures
are currently treated with antiseizure medications or
neurosurgery, both of which often result in incomplete
or impermanent seizure reduction. Antiseizure BMIs
have shown considerable promise for further improving quality of life. These fully implanted BMIs operate
by continuously monitoring neural activity in a brain
region determined to be involved with seizures. They
identify unusual activity that is predictive of seizure
onset and then respond within milliseconds to disrupt
this activity by electrically stimulating the same or a
different brain region. This closed-loop response can
be fast enough that seizure symptoms are not felt and
seizures do not occur.
BMIs are capable of restoring more than lost sensory
or motor capabilities. They are, in principle, capable of
restoring internal brain processing. Of the four categories of BMIs, this is the most futuristic. An example is
a “replacement part” BMI. The central idea is that if
enough is known about the function of a brain region,
and if this region is damaged by disease or injury, then
it may be possible to replace this brain region.
Once the normal input activity to a brain region
is measured (see next section), the function of the lost
brain region could then be modeled in electronic hardware and software, and the output from this substitute
processing center would then be delivered to the next
brain region as though no injury had occurred. This
would involve, for example, reading out neural activity with electrodes, mimicking the brain region’s computational functions with low-power microelectronic
circuits, and then writing in electrical neural activity
with stimulating electrodes.
This procedure might also be used to initiate and
guide neural plasticity. A replacement part BMI that
is currently being investigated focuses on restoring
memory by replacing parts of the hippocampus that
are damaged due to injury or disease. Another potential application would be to restore the lost functionality of a brain region damaged by stroke.
These systems represent the natural evolution of
the BMI concept, a so-called “platform technology”
because a large number of systems can be envisioned
by mixing and matching various write-in, computational, and read-out components. The number of neurological diseases and injuries that BMIs should be able
to help address ought to increase as our understanding
of the functions of the nervous system and the sophistication of the technology continue to grow.
Measuring and modulating neural activity involves
four broad areas of electronic technologies applied to
the nervous system (so-called neurotechnology). The
first area is the type of neural sensor; artificial neural
sensors are designed with different levels of invasiveness and spatial resolution (Figure 39–2). Sensors that
are external to the body, such as an electroencephalogram
(EEG) cap, have been used extensively in recent decades. The EEG measures signals from many small metal
disks (electrodes) applied to the surface of the scalp
across the head. Each electrode detects average activity from a large number of neurons beneath it.
More recently, implantable electrode-array techniques, such as subdural electrocorticography (ECoG)
and finely spaced micro-ECoG electrodes, have been
used. Since ECoG electrodes are on the surface of the
brain and are thus much closer to neurons than EEG
electrodes, ECoG has higher spatial and temporal resolution and thus provides more information with which
to control BMIs.
Most recently, arrays of penetrating intracortical
electrodes, which we focus on in this chapter, have been
used. The intracortical electrode arrays are made of silicon or other materials and coated with biocompatible
materials. The arrays are implanted on the surface of
the brain, with the electrode tips penetrating 1 to 2 mm
into the cortex. They have the ability to record action
potentials from individual neurons, as well as local
field potentials from small clusters of neurons near
each electrode tip. The electrodes are able to record
high-fidelity signals because they are inserted into the
brain, bringing the electrode tips within micrometers
of neurons. This is beneficial for BMI performance
because individual neurons are the fundamental
information-encoding units in the nervous system,
and action potentials are the fundamental units of the
digital code that carries information from the input to
the output region of a neuron. Moreover, intracortical
electrodes can deliver electrical microstimulation to
either disrupt neural activity (eg, DBS) or write in surrogate information (eg, proprioceptive or somatosensory information).
The second area of neurotechnology is scaling up
the number of neurons measured at the same time.
While one neuron contains some information about a
person’s intended movement, tens to hundreds of neurons are needed to move a BMI more naturally, and
even more neurons are needed to approach naturalistic levels of motor function. Although it is possible to
place electrode arrays in many areas across the brain,
thereby gaining more information from multiple areas,
a key challenge is to measure activity from thousands
of neurons within each individual brain area. Many
efforts are underway to achieve this goal, including use
of electrode arrays with many tiny shafts, each with
hundreds of electrode contacts along its length; many
tiny electrodes that are not physically wired together,
but are instead inserted into the brain as stand-alone
islands that transmit data outside of the head and
receive power wirelessly; and optical imaging technologies that can capture the activity of hundreds or more
neurons by detecting how each neuron’s fluorescence
changes over time.
The third area is low-power electronics for signal acquisition, wireless data communications, and
wireless powering. In contrast to the BMI systems
described above, which implant a passive electrode
array in which each electrode is wired to the outside world by a connector passing through the skin,
future BMIs will be fully implanted like DBS systems.
Electronic circuits are needed to amplify neural signals, digitize them, process them (eg, to detect when 
an action potential occurred or to estimate local field
potential power), and transmit this information to a
nearby receiver incorporated into a prosthetic arm,
for example. Power consumption must be minimized
for two reasons. First, the more power is consumed,
the more power a battery or a wireless charging system would need to provide. Batteries would therefore
need to be larger and replaced more often, and delivering power wirelessly is challenging. Second, using
power generates heat, and the brain can only tolerate a
small temperature increase before there are deleterious
effects. These trade-offs are similar to those of smart
phones, which represent the current best technology
available for low-power electronics.
The final area is so-called supervisory systems.
Software running on electronic hardware is at the
heart of BMIs. Some software implements the mathematical operations of the neural decoding, while
other software must tend to aspects of the BMI’s overall operation. For example, the supervisory software
should monitor whether or not a person wishes to use
the prosthesis (eg, if the person is sleeping); if neural
signals have changed, thereby requiring recalibration
of the decoder; and overall BMI performance and
safety.
Having discussed the range of different BMIs and
neurotechnologies being developed, in the rest of this
chapter we focus on motor and communication BMIs.
We first describe different types of decoding algorithms and how they work. We then describe recent
progress in BMI development toward assisting paralyzed people and amputees. Next, we consider how
sensory feedback can improve BMI performance and
how BMIs can be used as an experimental paradigm to
address basic scientific questions about brain function.
Finally, we conclude with a cautionary note about ethical issues that can arise with BMIs.
Various aspects of movement—including position,
velocity, acceleration, and force—are encoded in the
activity of neurons throughout the motor system
(Chapter 34). Even though our understanding of
movement encoding in the motor system is incomplete, there is usually a reliable relationship between
aspects of movement and neural activity. This reliable relationship allows us to estimate the desired
movement from neural activity, a key component of
a BMI.
To study movement encoding, one typically considers the activity of an individual neuron across
repeated movements (referred to as “trials”) to the
same target. The activity of the neuron can be averaged
across many trials to create a spike histogram for each
target (Figure 39–3A). By comparing the spike histograms for different targets, one can characterize how
the neuron’s activity varies with the movement produced. One can also assess using the spike histograms
whether the neuron is more involved in movement
preparation or movement execution.
In contrast, estimating a subject’s desired movement from neural activity (referred to as movement
decoding) needs to be performed on an individual
trial while the neural activity is being recorded. The
activity of a single neuron cannot unambiguously
provide such information. Thus, the BMI must monitor the activity of many neurons on a single trial
(Figure 39–3B) rather than one neuron on many trials.
A desired movement can be decoded from the neural
activity associated with either preparation or execution of the movement. Whereas preparation activity
is related to the movement goal execution activity is
related to the moment-by-moment details of movement (Chapter 34).
Millions of neurons across multiple brain areas
work together to produce a movement as simple as
reaching for a cup. Yet in many BMIs, desired movements can be decoded reasonably accurately from the
activity of dozens of neurons recorded from a single brain
area. Although this may seem surprising, the fact is that
the motor system has a great deal of redundancy—many
neurons carry similar information about a desired
movement (Chapter 34). This is reasonable because
millions of neurons are involved in controlling the contractions of dozens of muscles. Thus, most of the neurons in regions of dorsal premotor cortex and primary
motor cortex controlling arm movement are informative about most arm movements.
When decoding a movement, the activity of one
neuron provides only incomplete information about
the movement, whereas the activity of many neurons
can provide substantially more accurate information
about the movement. This is true for activity associated with both movement preparation and execution.
There are two reasons why using multiple neurons is
helpful for decoding. First, a typical neuron alone cannot unambiguously determine the intended movement
direction. Consider a neuron whose activity (during
either preparation or execution) is related to movement direction via a cosine function, known as a tuning
curve (Figure 39–4A). If this neuron fires at 30 spikes
per second, the intended movement direction could
be either 120° or 240°. However, by recording from a
second neuron whose tuning curve is different from
that of the first neuron, the movement direction can be 
more accurately determined. If the second neuron fires
at 5 spikes per second, corresponding to a movement
in either the 60° or 120° direction, the only movement
direction that is consistent between the two neurons is
120° (Figure 39–4B). Thus, by recording from these two
neurons simultaneously, the intended reach direction
can be determined more accurately than by recording from one neuron. (However, two neurons do not
necessarily provide a perfect estimate of the intended
reach direction due to noise, as described next.)
The second reason why decoding a movement
from the activity of several neurons gives greater accuracy is because a neuron’s activity level usually varies
across repeated movements in the same direction. This
variability is typically referred to as spiking “noise.”
Let us say that due to spiking noise the first neuron
fires at slightly less than 30 spikes per second and the
second neuron fires at slightly more than 5 spikes per
second (Figure 39–4C). Under these conditions, no single movement direction is consistent with the activity
level of both neurons. Instead, a compromise must be
made between the two neurons to determine a movement direction that is as consistent as possible with their
activities. By extending this concept to more than two
neurons, the movement direction can be decoded even
more accurately as the number of neurons increases.
Movement decoders are a central component of
BMIs. There are two types of BMI decoders: discrete
and continuous (Figure 39–3C). A discrete decoder estimates one of several possible movement goals. Each
of these movement goals could correspond to a letter
on a keyboard. A discrete decoder solves a classification problem in statistics and can be applied to either
preparation activity or execution activity. A continuous
decoder estimates the moment-by-moment details of
a movement trajectory. This is important, for example, for reaching around obstacles or turning a steering wheel. A continuous decoder solves a regression
problem in statistics and is usually applied to execution activity rather than preparation activity because
the moment-by-moment details of a movement can
be more accurately estimated from execution activity
(Chapter 34).
Motor BMIs must produce movement trajectories as accurately as possible to achieve the desired
movement and typically use a continuous decoder
to do this. In contrast, communication BMIs are concerned with enabling the individual to transmit information as rapidly as possible. Thus, the speed and
accuracy with which movement goals (or keys on a
keyboard) can be selected are of primary importance.
Communication BMIs can use a discrete decoder to
directly select a desired key on a keyboard or a continuous decoder to continuously guide the cursor to
the desired key, where only the key eventually struck
actually contributes to information conveyance. This
seemingly subtle distinction has implications that
influence the type of neural activity required and
therefore the brain area that is targeted, as well as the
type of decoder that is used.
Neural decoding involves two phases: calibration and ongoing use. In the calibration phase, the
relationship between neural activity and movement
is characterized by a statistical model. This can be
achieved by recording neural activity while a paralyzed person attempts to move, imagines moving, or
passively observes movements of a computer cursor or
robotic limb. Once the relationship has been defined,
the statistical model can then be used to decode new
observed neural activity (ongoing use phase). The goal
during the ongoing use phase is to find the movement
that is most consistent with the observed neural activity
(Figure 39–4B,C).
We first define a population activity space, where each
axis represents the firing rate of one neuron. On each
trial (ie, movement repetition), we can measure the firing rate of each neuron during a specified period, and
together they yield one point in the population activity
space. Across many trials, involving multiple movement goals, there will be a scatter of points in the population activity space. If the neural activity is related
to the movement goal, then the points will be separated in the population activity space according to the
movement goal (Figure 39–5A). During the calibration
phase, decision boundaries that partition the population
activity space into different regions are determined
by a statistical model. Each region corresponds to one
movement goal.
During the ongoing use phase, we measure
new neural activity for which the movement goal is
unknown (Figure 39–5B). The decoded movement goal
is determined by the region in which the neural activity
lies. For example, if the neural activity lies within the
region corresponding to the leftward target, then the
discrete decoder would guess that the subject intended
to move to the leftward target on that trial. It is possible that the subject intended to move to the rightward
target, even though the recorded activity lies within
the region corresponding to the leftward target. In this
case, the discrete decoder would incorrectly estimate
the subject’s intended movement goal. Decoding accuracy typically increases with an increasing number of
simultaneously recorded neurons.
Arm position, velocity, acceleration, force, and other
aspects of arm movement can be decoded using the
methods described here with varying levels of accuracy. For concreteness, we will discuss decoding movement velocity because it is one of the quantities most
strongly reflected in the activity of motor cortical 
neurons and is the starting point for the design of most
BMI systems.
Consider a population of neurons whose level of
activity indicates the movement velocity (ie, speed and
direction). During the calibration phase, a “pushing
vector” is determined for each neuron (Figure 39–6A). A
pushing vector indicates how a neuron’s activity influences movement velocity. Various continuous decoding
algorithms differ in how they determine the pushing vectors. One of the earliest decoding algorithms,
the population vector algorithm (PVA), assigns each
neuron’s pushing vector to point along the neuron’s
preferred direction (see Figure 34–22A). A neuron’s
preferred direction is defined as the direction of movement for which the neuron shows the highest level of
activity (ie, peak of curves in Figure 39–4). Much of
the pioneering work on BMIs used the PVA. However,
the PVA does not take into account the properties of the
spiking noise (ie, its variance and covariance across
neurons), which influences the accuracy of the decoded
movements. A more accurate decoder, the optimal linear estimator (OLE), incorporates the properties of the
spiking noise to determine the pushing vectors.
During the ongoing use phase, the pushing vectors are each scaled by the number of spikes emitted
by the corresponding neuron at each time step (Figure
39–6B). At each time step, the decoded movement is
the vector sum of the scaled pushing vectors across all
neurons. The decoded movement represents a change
in position during one time step (ie, velocity). The
BMI cursor (or limb) position (Figure 39–6C) is then
updated according to the decoded movement.
To further improve decoding accuracy, the estimation of velocity at each time step should take into
account not only current neural activity (as illustrated
in Figure 39–6), but also neural activity in the recent
past. The rationale is that movement velocity (and
other kinematic variables) changes gradually over
time, and so neural activity in the recent past should
be informative about the movement velocity. This
can be achieved by temporally smoothing the neural
activity before applying a PVA or OLE or by using a
Kalman filter to define a statistical model describing
how movement velocity (or other kinematic variables)
changes smoothly over time. With a Kalman filter, the
estimated velocity is a combination of the scaled pushing vectors at the current time step (as in Figure 39–6B)
and the estimated velocity at the previous time step.
Indeed, continuous decoding algorithms that take into
account neural activity in the recent past have been
shown to provide higher decoding accuracy than those
that do not. The Kalman filter and its extensions are
widely used in BMIs and among the most accurate
continuous decoding algorithms available.
Patients with paralysis wish to perform activities of
daily living. For people with ALS or upper spinal cord
injury who are unable to speak or to move their arms,
the most desired tasks are often the ability to communicate, to move a prosthetic (robotic) arm, or to move
the paralyzed arm by stimulating the musculature.
Having described how neural signals can be read out
from motor areas of the brain and how these electrical
signals can be decoded to arrive at BMI control signals,
we now describe recent progress toward restoring
these abilities.
The majority of laboratory studies are carried out
in able-bodied nonhuman primates, although paralysis
is sometimes transiently induced in important control
experiments. Three types of experimental paradigms
are in broad use, differing in the exact way in which
arm behavior is instructed and visual feedback is provided during BMI calibration and ongoing use. Setting
these differences aside, we focus below on how BMIs
function and perform. We also highlight recent pilot
clinical trials with people with paralysis.
To investigate how quickly and accurately a communication BMI employing a discrete decoder and preparation activity can operate, monkeys were trained to
fixate and touch central targets and prepare to reach to
a peripheral target that could appear at one of several
different locations on a computer screen. Spikes were
recorded using electrodes implanted in the premotor
cortex. The number of spikes occurring during a particular time window during the preparation epoch was
used to predict where the monkey was preparing to
reach (Figure 39–7A). If the decoded target matched
the peripheral target, a liquid reward was provided to
indicate a successful trial.
By varying the duration of the period in which
spike counts are taken and the number of possible targets, it was possible to assess the speed and accuracy
of target selections (Figure 39–7B). Decoding accuracy
tended to increase with the period in which spike
counts are taken because spiking noise is more easily
averaged out in longer periods.
An important metric for efficient communication
is information transfer rate (ITR), which measures
how much information can be conveyed per unit time.
A basic unit of information is a bit, which is specified
by a binary value (0 or 1). For example, with three
bits of information, one can specify which of 23
 = 8
possible targets or keys to press. Thus, the metric for
ITR is bits per second (bps). ITR increases with the
period in which spike counts are taken, then declines.
The reason is that ITR takes into account both how accurately and how quickly each target is selected. Beyond
some point of diminishing returns of a longer period,
accuracy fails to increase rapidly enough to overcome
the slowdown in target-selection rate accompanying a
longer period.
Overall performance (ITR) increases with the number of possible targets, despite a decrease in decoding
accuracy, because each correct target selection conveys
more information. Fast and accurate communication 
has been demonstrated in BMIs with this design based
on a discrete decoder applied to preparatory activity.
The ITR of this BMI is approximately 6.5 bps, which
corresponds to approximately two to three targets per
second with greater than 90% accuracy.
Recent studies have also investigated how quickly
and accurately a communication BMI employing a
continuous decoder and execution activity can operate. Two different types of continuous decoders were
evaluated: a standard Kalman filter decoding movement velocity (V-KF) and a recalibrated feedback
intention-trained Kalman filter (ReFIT-KF). The V-KF
was calibrated using the neural activity recorded during actual arm movements (ie, open-loop control). The
ReFIT-KF incorporated the closed-loop nature of BMIs
into decoder calibration by assuming that the user
desired to move the cursor straight to the target at each
time step.
To assess performance, both types of decoders
were used in closed-loop BMI control (Figure 39–8A).
Monkeys were required to move a computer cursor
from a central location to eight peripheral locations
and back. A gold standard for performance evaluation
was established by having the monkeys also perform
the same task using arm movements. The ReFIT-KF
outperformed the V-KF in several ways: Cursor movements using ReFIT-KF were straighter, producing less
movement away from a straight line to the target; cursor movements were faster, approaching the speed of
arm movements (Figure 39–8B); and there were fewer
(potentially frustrating) long trials.
Given its performance benefits, the ReFIT-KF is
being used in clinical trials by people with paralysis
(Figure 39–8C). Spiking activity was recorded using
a 96-channel electrode array implanted in the hand
control area of the left motor cortex. Signals were filtered to extract action potentials and high-frequency
local field potentials, which were decoded to provide
“point-and-click” control of the BMI-controlled cursor.
The subject was seated in front of a computer monitor
and was asked, “How did you encourage your sons
to practice music?” By attempting to move her right
hand, the computer cursor moved across the screen
and stopped over the desired letter. By attempting to
squeeze her left hand, the letter beneath the cursor was
selected, much like clicking a mouse button.
BMI performance in the clinical trials was assessed
by measuring the number of intended characters subjects were able to type (Figure 39–8D). Subjects were
able to demonstrate that the letters they typed were
intended by using the delete key to erase occasional
mistakes. These clinical tests showed that it is possible
to type at a rate of many words per minute using a BMI.
Patients with paralysis would like to pick up objects,
feed themselves, and generally interact physically
with the world. Motor BMIs with prosthetic limbs
aim to restore this lost motor functionality. As before,
neural activity is decoded from the brain but is now
routed to a robotic arm where the wrist is moved in
three dimensions (x, y, and z) and the hand is moved in
an additional dimension (grip angle, ranging from an
open hand to a closed hand).
In one test of a robotic arm, a patient with paralysis
was able to use her neural activity to direct the robotic
arm to reach out, grab a bottle of liquid, and bring it
to her mouth (Figure 39–9). The three-dimensional
reaches and gripping were slower and less accurate
than natural arm and hand movements. Importantly,
this demonstrated that the same BMI paradigm originally developed with animals, including measuring
and decoding signals from motor cortex, works in people even years after the onset of neural degeneration or
the time of neural injury.
BMI devices directing prosthetic arms and hands
are now able to do more than just control threedimensional movement or open and close the hand.
They can also orient the hand and grasp, manipulate,
and carry objects. A person with paralysis was able to
move a prosthetic limb with 10 degrees of freedom to
grasp objects of different shapes and sizes and move
them from one place to another (Figure 39–10). Completion times for grasping and moving objects were
considerably slower than natural arm movements, but
the results are encouraging. These studies illustrate
the existing capabilities of prosthetic arms and also the
potential for even greater capabilities in the future.
An alternative to using a robotic arm is to restore lost
motor function to the biological arm. Arm paralysis
results from the loss of neural signaling from the spinal
cord and brain, but the muscles themselves are often
still intact and can be made to contract by electrical
stimulation. This capacity underlies functional electrical stimulation (FES), which sends electrical signals via
internal or external electrodes to a set of muscle groups.
By shaping and timing the electrical signals sent to the
different muscle groups, FES is able to move the arm
and hand in a coordinated fashion to pick up objects.
Laboratory studies in monkeys have demonstrated that this basic approach is viable in principle. 
It is implemented by calibrating a continuous decoder
to predict the intended activity of each of several of
the muscles, transiently paralyzed with a nerve block.
These predictions are then used to control the intensity
of stimulation of the same paralyzed muscles, which
in turn controls motor outputs such as a grip angle
and force. This process in effect bypasses the spinal
cord and restores some semblance of voluntary control
of the paralyzed arm and hand. Similar results have
recently been demonstrated in patients with paralysis using either externally applied or fully implanted
state-of-the-art FES electrodes. Intracortically recorded
signals from motor cortex were decoded to restore
movement via FES in a person with upper spinal cord
injury (Figure 39–11). The subject was able to achieve
control of different wrist and hand motions, including
finger movements, and perform various activities of
daily living.
During arm movements, we rely on multiple sources of
sensory feedback to guide the arm along a desired path
or to a desired goal. These sources include visual, proprioceptive, and somatosensory feedback. However, in
most current BMI systems, the user receives only visual
feedback about the movements of the computer cursor
or robotic limb. In patients with normal motor output pathways but lacking proprioception, arm movements are substantially less accurate than in healthy
individuals, both in terms of movement direction and
extent. Furthermore, in tests of BMI cursor control in
healthy nonhuman primate subjects, the arm continues to provide proprioceptive feedback even though
arm movements are not required to move the cursor.
BMI cursor control is more accurate when the arm is
passively moved together with the BMI cursor along
the same path, rather than along a different path. This
demonstrates the importance of “correct” proprioceptive feedback. Based on these two lines of evidence, it is
perhaps not surprising that BMI-directed movements
relying solely on visual feedback are slower and less
accurate than normal arm movements. This has motivated recent attempts to demonstrate how providing
surrogate (ie, artificial) proprioceptive or somatosensory feedback can improve BMI performance.
Several studies have attempted to write in sensory information by stimulating the brain using cortical electrical microstimulation. Laboratory animals
can discriminate current pulses of different frequencies and amplitudes, and this ability can be utilized to
provide proprioceptive or somatosensory information
in BMIs by using different pulse frequencies to encode
different physical locations (akin to proprioception) or
different textures (akin to somatic sensation). Electrical
microstimulation in the primary somatosensory cortex
can be used by nonhuman primates to control a cursor on a moment-by-moment basis without vision. In
these subjects, the use of electrical microstimulation 
and visual feedback together led to more accurate
movements than either type of sensory feedback alone.
Furthermore, electrical microstimulation in the primary somatosensory cortex can also be used to provide
tactile information. Nonhuman primates moved a BMIdirected cursor under visual feedback to hit different
visual targets, each of which elicited a different stimulation frequency. Subjects learned to use differences in the
stimulation feedback to distinguish the rewarded target
from the unrewarded targets. This demonstrates that
electrical microstimulation can also be used to provide
somatosensory feedback during BMI control.
Finally, surrogate somatosensory information was
delivered via electrical microstimulation to a person
with paralysis and compromised sensory afferents.
The person reported naturalistic sensations at different locations of his hand and fingers corresponding to
different locations of stimulation in the primary somatosensory cortex.
BMIs are becoming an increasingly important experimental tool for addressing basic scientific questions
about brain function. For example, cochlear implants
have provided insight into how the brain processes
sounds and speech, how the development of these
mechanisms is shaped by language acquisition, and
how neural plasticity allows the brain to interpret a
few channels of stimulation carrying impoverished
auditory information. Similarly, motor and communication BMIs are helping to elucidate the neural mechanisms underlying sensorimotor control. Such scientific
findings can then be used to refine the design of BMIs.
The key benefit of BMIs for basic science is that
they can simplify the brain’s input and output interface
with the outside world, without simplifying the complexities of brain processing that one wishes to study. 
To illustrate this point, consider the output interface of
the brain for controlling arm movements. Thousands
of neurons from the motor cortex and other brain areas
send signals down the spinal cord and to the arm, where
they activate muscles that move the arm. Understanding how the brain controls arm movement is challenging because one can typically record from only a small
fraction of the output neurons that send signals down
the spinal cord, the relationship between the activity of
the output neurons and arm movements is unknown,
and the arm has nonlinear dynamics that are difficult
to measure. Furthermore, it is usually difficult to determine which recorded neurons are output neurons.
One way to ease this difficulty is to use a BMI.
Because of the way a BMI is constructed, only those
neurons that are recorded can directly affect the movement of the cursor or robotic limb. Neurons throughout the brain are still involved, but they can influence
the cursor movements only indirectly through the
recorded neurons. Thus, in contrast to arm and eye
movement studies, one can record from the entire set
of output neurons in a BMI, and BMI-directed movements can be causally attributed to specific changes in
the activity of the recorded neurons. Furthermore, the
mapping between the activity of the recorded neurons
and cursor movement is defined by the experimenter,
so it is fully known. This mapping can be defined to be
simple and can be easily altered by the experimenter
during an experiment. In essence, a BMI defines a
simplified sensorimotor loop, whose components are
more concretely defined and more easily manipulated
than for arm or eye movements.
These advantages of BMIs allow for studies of
brain function that are currently difficult to perform
using arm or eye movements. For example, one class
of studies involves using BMIs to study how the brain
learns. The BMI mapping defines which population
activity patterns will allow the subject to successfully
move the BMI-directed cursor to hit visual targets. By
defining the BMI mapping appropriately, the experimenter can challenge the subject’s brain to produce
novel neural activity patterns.
A recent study explored what types of activity
patterns are easier and more difficult for the brain to
generate. They found that it was easier for subjects to
learn new associations between existing activity patterns and cursor movements than to generate novel
activity patterns. This finding has implications for
our ability to learn everyday skills. A second class of
studies involves asking how the activity of neurons
that directly control movement differ from those that
do not directly control movement. In a BMI, one can
choose to use only a subset of the recorded neurons
(the output neurons) for controlling movements. At
the same time, other neurons (the nonoutput neurons)
can be passively monitored without being used for
controlling movements. Comparing the activity of output and nonoutput neurons can provide insight into
how a network of neurons internally processes information and relays only some of that information to
other networks.
Using this paradigm, a recent study recorded
neural activity simultaneously in the primary cortex
and striatum and designated a subset of the M1 neurons as the output neurons for controlling the BMI.
They found that, during BMI learning, M1 neurons
that were most relevant for behavior (the output
neurons) preferentially increased their coordination
with the striatum, which is known to play an important role during natural behavior (Chapter 38).
Identifying output versus nonoutput neurons in
a study using arm or eye movements would be
challenging.
A growing number of biomedical ethics considerations
centered on the brain have arisen from the dramatic
expansion in our understanding of neuroscience and
our capabilities with neurotechnology. These advances
are driven by society’s curiosity about the functioning of the brain, the least-well understood organ in
the body, as well as the desire to address the massive
unmet need of those suffering from neurological disease and injury. The use of BMIs raises new ethical
questions for four principal reasons.
First, recording high-fidelity signals (ie, spike
trains) involves risk, including the risks associated
with initial implantation of the electrodes as well
as possible biological (immunological or infectious)
responses during the lifetime of the electrodes and the
associated implanted electronics. Electrodes implanted
for long periods currently have functional lifetimes on
the order of many months to a few years, during which
time glial scar tissue can form around the electrodes
and electrode materials can fail. Efforts to increase the
functional lifetime of electrodes range from nanoscale
flexible electrodes made with new materials to mitigating immunological responses, as is done with cardiac
stents.
For these reasons, patients considering receiving
implanted recording technologies will need to evaluate the risks and benefits of a BMI, as is the case for
all medical interventions. It is important for patients to
have options, as each person has personal preferences
involving willingness to undergo surgery, desire for
functional restoration and outcome, and cosmesis—be
it while deliberating cancer treatment or BMI treatment. BMIs based on different neural sensors (Figure
39–2) have different risks and benefits.
Second, because BMIs can read out movement
information from the brain at fine temporal resolution, it seems plausible that they will be able to read
out more personal and private types of information as
well. Future neuroethics questions that may arise as
the technology becomes more sophisticated include
whether it is acceptable, even with patient consent,
to read out memories that may otherwise be lost to
Alzheimer disease; promote long-term memory consolidation by recording fleeting short-term memories
and playing them back directly into the brain; read
out subconscious fears or emotional states to assist
desensitization psychotherapy; or read out potential
intended movements, including speech, that would
not naturally be enacted.
Third, intracortical write-in BMIs, similar to DBS
systems currently used to reduce tremor, may one day
evoke naturalistic spatial-temporal activity patterns
across large populations of neurons. In the extreme
it may not be possible for a person to distinguish
self-produced and volitional neural activity patterns
from artificial or surrogate patterns. Although there
are numerous therapeutic and beneficial reasons for
embracing this technology, such as reducing tremor
or averting an epileptic seizure, more dubious uses
can be envisioned such as commandeering a person’s
motor, sensory, decision making, or emotional valence
circuits.
Finally, ethical questions also involve the limits
within which BMIs should operate. Current BMIs
focus on restoring lost function, but it is possible for
BMIs to be made to enhance function beyond natural levels. This is as familiar as prescribing a pair
of glasses that confer better than normal vision, or
overprescribing a pain medication, which can cause
euphoria that is often addictive. Should BMIs be
allowed, if and when it becomes technically possible, 
to move a robotic arm faster and more accurately
than a native arm? Should continuous neural recordings from BMIs, covering hours, days, or weeks, be
saved for future analysis, and are the security and
privacy issues the same or different from personal
genomics data? Should BMIs with preset content be
available for purchase, for example, to skip a grade
of mathematics in high school? Should an able-bodied
person be able to elect to receive an implanted motor
BMI? While the safe and ethical limits of such sensory, motor, and cognitive BMI treatments might
seem readily apparent, society continues to wrestle
with these same questions concerning other currently
available medical treatments. These include steroids
that enhance musculature, energy drinks (eg, caffeine)
that enhance alertness, and elective plastic surgery that
alters appearance.
Although many of these ideas and questions may
appear far-fetched at present, as mechanisms of brain
function and dysfunction continue to be revealed, BMI
systems could build on these discoveries and create
even more daunting ethical quandaries. But equally
important is the immediate need to help people suffering from profound neurological disease and injury
through restorative BMIs. In order to achieve the right
balance, it is imperative that physicians, scientists, and
engineers proceed in close conversation and partnership with ethicists, government oversight agencies,
and patient advocacy groups.
1. Brain–machine interfaces (BMIs) are medical
devices that read out and/or alter electrophysiological activity at the level of populations of
neurons. BMIs can help to restore lost sensory,
motor, or brain processing capabilities, as well as
regulate pathological neural activity.
 2. BMIs can help to restore lost sensory capabilities
by stimulating neurons to convey sensory information to the brain. Examples include cochlear
implants to restore audition or retinal prostheses
to restore vision.
 3. BMIs can help to restore lost motor capabilities
by measuring the activity from many individual
neurons, converting this neural information into
control signals, and guiding a paralyzed limb,
robotic limb, or computer cursor.
 4. Whereas motor BMIs aim to provide control of a
robotic limb or paralyzed limb, communication
BMIs aim to provide a fast and accurate interface
with a computer or other electronic devices.
 5. BMIs can help to regulate pathological neural
activity by measuring neural activity, processing
the neural activity, and subsequently stimulating
neurons. Examples include deep brain stimulators and antiseizure systems.
 6. Neural signals can be measured using different
technologies, including electroencephalography, electrocorticography, and intracortical electrodes. Intracortical electrodes record the activity
of neurons near the electrode tip and can also be
used to deliver electrical stimulation.
 7. To study movement encoding, one usually
considers the activity of an individual neuron
across many experimental trials. In contrast, for
movement decoding, one needs to consider the
activity of many neurons across an individual
experimental trial.
 8. A discrete decoder estimates one of several possible movement goals from neural population
activity. In contrast, a continuous decoder estimates the moment-by-moment details of a movement from neural population activity.
 9. The field is making substantial progress in
increasing the performance of BMIs, measured in
terms of the speed and accuracy of the estimated
movements. It is now possible to move a computer cursor in a way that approaches the speed
and accuracy of arm movements.
10. In addition to controlling computer cursors, BMIs
can also guide a robotic limb or a paralyzed limb
using functional electrical stimulation. Developments from preclinical experiments with ablebodied, nonhuman primates have subsequently
been tested in clinical trials with paralyzed people.
11. Future advances of BMI will depend, in part, on
developments in neurotechnology. These include
advances in hardware (eg, neural sensors and
low-power electronics), software (eg, supervisory
systems), and statistical methods (eg, decoding
algorithms).
12. An important direction for improving BMI performance is to provide the user with additional
forms of sensory feedback in addition to visual
feedback. An area of current investigation uses
stimulation of neurons to provide surrogate sensory feedback, representing somatosensation and
proprioception, during ongoing use.
13. Beyond helping paralyzed patients and amputees, BMI is being increasingly used as a tool for
understanding brain function. BMIs simplify the
brain’s input and output interfaces and allow
the experimenter to define a causal relationship
between neural activity and movement.
14. BMIs raise new neuroethics questions, which
need to be considered together with the benefits provided by BMIs to people with injury or
disease.