that our computational model can predict previously unknown circuit
functions and properties.
Finally, we sought to predict how water taste detection influences
feeding initiation. The degree to which sugar GRNs and water GRNs
activate pathways that are distinct or shared is unknown. We found
that activation of water GRNs in our model activates many downstream
neurons that are also activated by sugar stimulation. (Fig. 3f, Fig. 4a and
Supplementary Tables 1 and 6). In particular, comparing neurons activated
by sugar GRNs with those activated by water GRNs, at a stimulation
frequency at which each pathway activates MN9 at 40 Hz, predicted
that the sugar pathway activates 377 neurons, while the water pathway
activates 391 neurons. Of these, more than half (250), are shared
between the two circuits (Fig. 3f and Supplementary Table 4). We also
examined bitter responsive neurons and Ir94e responsive neurons at
the minimal activation sufficient to reduce 40 Hz MN9 firing to 1 Hz.
Only two neurons were common between sugar and bitter activation,
and 30 between sugar and Ir94e activation, demonstrating segregation
of neurons activated by aversive and appetitive taste (Fig. 3f). This
prediction is consistent with our previous calcium imaging experiments
demonstrating that, across nine sugar-responsive cell types,
zero respond to a mixture of bitter compounds4. In contrast, our model
predicts central neurons that respond to both sugar and water taste
activation, as well as sugar-specific and water-specific neurons, consistent
with brainwide calcium imaging studies29,46.
To identify interneurons that compose the water feeding initiation
circuit, we used the computational model to analyze the
water-responsive neurons that influence MN9 activity. We stimulated
the top 200 neurons that are predicted to respond to water, and identified
the subset that computationally activates MN9 (Fig. 4b). Next,
we also computationally activated water-sensing GRNs, silenced each
the Drosophila feeding initiation circuit because it has well-defined
taste sensory inputs and motor outputs that are contained in the Flywire
electron microscopy volume. Thus, computational modelling of the
feeding initiation circuit permits analysis of an entire sensorimotor
circuit, in contrast to other sensorimotor circuits that require descending
neurons, which are incomplete in the Flywire volume. Furthermore,
gustatory sensory neurons that respond to sugar, water and bitter tastes
have been identified in the electron microscopy volume23, permitting
a detailed analysis of how these modalities interact. In addition,
extensive experimental analysis provides a ground truth for computational
studies4,5,23–32. We further assessed the performance of the model
in another well-defined but non-overlapping circuit—the antennal
grooming circuit—as an independent evaluation of the model6–10. As
with the feeding initiation circuit, the antennal grooming circuit has
well-defined sensory inputs, and a discrete, easily quantified behavioural
output: antennal grooming behaviour. In both circuits, we tested
specific predictions that the computational model generated using
cell-type-specific genetic tools, optogenetics and functional imaging.
We find that the model makes predictions consistent with our empirical
observations, such as identification of neurons required for behavioural
output. Thus, our computational model reduces the vast complexity
of the connectome into simple, intuitive circuits.
In Drosophila feeding initiation, detection of appetitive substances
in hungry flies results in proboscis extension and consumption33. Gustatory
receptor neurons (GRNs) on the body surface of the fly, including
the labellum (tip of the proboscis) or the legs, respond directly to
tastants and project to the primary taste centre of the insect brain—the
suboesophageal zone (SEZ)23,33–37. GRNs respond to specific taste categories,
such as appetitive sugar or aversive bitter compounds, resulting
in acceptance (that is, proboscis extension and feeding) or avoidance,
respectively24,33,35,38.To examine the neural circuits that influence feeding
in response to taste detection, we focussed on four GRN categories:
sugar, water, bitter and a fourth GRN category labelled by the ionotropic
receptor Ir94e. Ir94e neurons respond to salt and the presentation of
male genitals, but the exact tastants Ir94e neurons respond to are not
well understood31,33,37,38. These GRNs have been identified and classified
previously in the electron microscopy brain volume23; we verify
and expand on this classification by clustering on the basis of connectivity
and comparing this clustering with response properties of
second-order neurons (Extended Data Fig. 1a–c and Methods).
When a fly encounters sugar, activation of appetitive GRNs results in
activation of proboscis motor neurons (MNs) (Fig. 1b). The proboscis
consists of three segments: the rostrum, the haustellum and the lip-like
labella, controlled by the activity of 16 MNs32. We find that computational
activation of labellar sugar-sensing GRNs activates several
proboscis MNs involved in feeding, including MNs 6, 8, 9 and 11 (Fig. 1c,
Extended Data Fig. 1d and Supplementary Table 1)39. Consistent with
the model’s predictions, MN9 and MN11 have been shown previously to
respond to sugar stimulation in vivo5,39. In total, we find that the computational
model can model a complete sensorimotor transformation.
To assess the ability of our computational model to predict the composition
and function of the feeding initiation circuit, we focussed
specifically on the activity of MN9, which controls rostrum lifting during
proboscis extension5,32. The rostrum is the largest portion of the
proboscis, permitting quantification of MN9 activity by measuring
rostrum lifting. Although the exact correlation between MN9 firing
rate and rostrum lifting is not known, we assume that increased MN9
firing rates correspond with increased rostrum lifting probability.
Remarkably, unilateral sugar GRN activation activates the contralateral
MN9 more strongly compared with the ipsilateral MN9 when either
the left (Fig. 1c) or the right (Extended Data Fig. 1d) hemisphere GRNs
are activated, consistent with behavioural experiments showing that
unilateral taste detection on the legs promotes proboscis extension
that is curved and directed towards the food source26,40. Thus, we show
that in silico sensory activation produces MN activity that is consistent
with the observed behaviour of the fly taste sensorimotor circuit.
To confirm that our computational activation of MN9 depends on
the actual connectivity weights determined from the fly connectome,
we tested whether distorting synaptic weights would impair the ability
of sugar sensory neurons to activate MN9. In these experiments,
connectivity weights were shuffled randomly (while maintaining the
global connectivity weight distribution). Although modelling using
the correct connectome results in robust activation of MN9 in 100% of
simulations when sugar-sensing neurons are activated at 100 Hz, only
1 of 100 shuffled simulations did (Supplementary Table 1d). Therefore,
the predictive accuracy of our computational model depends on the
actual connectivity weights of the fly connectome.
We next examined whether the computational model could accurately
predict the neuronal cell types that are known to compose the
feeding initiation circuit4. We first examined the neural network activated
upon unilateral sugar GRN activation. We note that, given the
variety of assumptions the model relies upon, absolute firing rate predictions
are unlikely to be accurate; therefore, we examined network
activity upon sugar GRN activation ranging from 10 to 200 Hz (Fig. 1d).
We find that increasing sugar GRN firing rate increases activity of MN9,
as well as MNs 6, 8 and 11. Of the 127,400 neurons modelled, we found
that 45 are predicted to respond to 10 Hz sugar GRN activation, and 455
to 200 Hz (Supplementary Table 1). Activated neurons are defined as
neurons that have greater than 0 Hz firing. Thus, the computational
model predicts a large network activated by sugar taste detection that
includes known sugar-responsive MNs.
Sugar taste detection influences activity in nutritive state and memory
circuits, and modulates a broad range of behaviours, including
feeding, oviposition and foraging33,37,41. To specifically evaluate the
subset of predicted sugar-responsive neurons that influence feeding
initiation, we performed two further in silico experiments. First, as
a strategy to identify neurons that drive feeding initiation, we computationally
stimulated each of the top sugar-responding neurons
in the network to identify those that drive activity in MN9 (Fig. 1e).
Second, to identify neurons required for feeding initiation to sugars,
we computationally activated sugar GRNs, silenced each of the top 200
sugar-responsive neurons one at a time, and measured the change in
predicted MN9 firing (Fig. 1f,g). For these silencing experiments, we
activated sugar-sensing neurons at frequencies ranging from 50 to
120 Hz in 10 Hz increments. Neurons that our model predicts to be
required for feeding initiation will have decreased MN9 firing when
silenced. We defined neurons predicted to cause a silencing phenotype
as any neuron whose silencing causes MN9 firing to be 80% or lower
compared with control MN9 firing at any of the eight sugar activation
frequencies tested (50, 60, 70, …120 Hz; Fig. 1f). In general, silencing
of individual neurons had the greatest effect when sugar GRNs were
activated at low frequencies, implying greater redundancy in the circuit
as sensory stimulation increases. In total, our analyses identified 47
neurons predicted to be sugar-responsive, and sufficient for feeding
initiation. Of these 47 neurons, 14 are also predicted to be required for
MN9 activity (Fig. 1h).
We next evaluated whether the predicted neurons for feeding initiation
include neurons shown experimentally to participate in feeding
initiation behaviour. Previous experimental studies identified ten
neural classes that respond to sugar, and are sufficient for proboscis
extension4 (Fig. 1b and Extended Data Fig. 2a–c). Our computational
model correctly predicts that all ten cell types respond to sugar (Supplementary
Table 2). Of these ten neurons, eight are predicted correctly
to be sufficient to activate MN9 (ref. 4) (Supplementary Table 2). We
previously found that five of the ten are required for sugar feeding
initiation4 (Supplementary Table 2). Of these five, three are predicted
by our computational model to cause a greater than 20% decrease in
MN9 firing, and one of the others is predicted to cause a statistically
significant decrease in MN9 firing, but less than 20%, when silenced.
Although the model predictions generally match previous experimental
results, there are some deviations. For example, the model fails to
correctly predict that the Phantom cell type will activate MN9 (ref. 4)
(Fig. 1e, Extended Data Fig. 2c and Supplementary Table 2). This cell
type is predicted to be inhibitory. Phantom strongly synapses onto
Scapula—a neuron that is also predicted to be inhibitory; Scapula, in
turn, synapses onto Roundup, the pre-MN with the strongest predicted
silencing phenotype. We speculate that activation of Phantom inhibits
Scapula, potentially permitting Roundup and MN9 firing. Because the
basal firing rate of all neurons in the model is 0, activation of inhibitory
neurons in the model, in the absence of other input, cannot alter the
firing of downstream neurons. A further explanation for incorrect
predictions could be neuromodulation, which is not accounted for in
our model. Particular neurons may be subject to neuromodulation,
causing their activity to be different from predictions on the basis
of connectivity. Alternatively, neurons that express neuromodulators
may be poorly modelled. We speculated that the Usnea cell type,
which has a strong experimental activation and silencing phenotype4
yet is not predicted to be either necessary or sufficient for proboscis
extension, might be neuropeptidergic. To test this, we performed
cell-specific knockdown of the gene Amontillado—a prohormone
convertase required for neuropeptide processing in Drosophila42,43.
Knockdown of Amontillado phenocopied the Usnea silencing phenotype
(Extended Data Fig. 1e), indicating that Usnea activity may require
neuropeptide processing. Additionally, incorrect neurotransmitter
predictions or other assumptions of the model may explain discrepancies
between the prediction of our model and our experimental
results. Despite these limitations, overall, this analysis demonstrates
that our computational model correctly identifies known neurons in a
sensorimotor circuit.
As an independent assessment of whether the computational model
accurately predicts neurons that elicit MN9 activity, the output of our
sensorimotor circuit, we compared optogenetic activation phenotypes
with their corresponding computational activation phenotypes. To do
this in a non-biased way, we performed a screen in which we optogenetically
activated individual neuronal cell types with split-GAL4 lines and
monitored the activity of MN9. The SEZ split-GAL4 collection labels
138 cell types in the SEZ—the primary feeding region of the brain44. We
identified 106 of these labelled cell types in the Flywire volume. Next, we
crossed these split-GAL4 lines to create flies expressing the light-gated
cation channel CsChrimson. We then optogenetically activated these
neurons, and measured whether MN9 is activated by observing rostrum
extension. We compared the predicted in silico MN9 activation
phenotypes of these cell types when we activate them between 10 Hz
and 200 Hz with the actual optogenetic activation MN9 phenotypes
we observed. When we activate each cell type at 50 Hz, 11 are predicted
to activate MN9 (that is, elicit MN9 firing greater than 0 Hz); notably,
10 of 11 of these cell types actually do elicit rostrum extension when
optogenetically activated (Fig. 2a–c and Supplementary Table 3). Furthermore,
of the 95 predicted not to elicit proboscis extension due to
50 Hz activation, just 4 have non-zero rostrum extension. Activation
of these cell types at 200 Hz, rather than 50 Hz, results in the addition
of five false positives. At 10 Hz activation, six cell types are predicted
to cause MN9 activation; of these five, six do indeed cause proboscis
extension. Thus, the computational model can predict the activation
phenotypes of a non-biased sample of cell types at greater than 90%
accuracy.
The accuracy of the model indicates that it provides a powerful platform
to discover how different taste modalities are processed to influence
feeding initiation. We first tested whether the model can predict
the response to coactivation of both an attractive sugar stimulus and an
aversive bitter stimulus. Bitter detection inhibits proboscis extension
motor activity45 (Fig. 3a). Indeed, the addition of bitter GRN activity
to sugar GRN activation in our model resulted in an inhibition of MN6
and MN9 (Fig. 3b and Supplementary Table 4). We previously found,
using calcium imaging, that bitter GRN activation inhibits the sugar
pathway at the level of pre-MNs4, consistent with the predictions of
the computational model (Supplementary Table 4).
We next examined the predicted circuit activity caused by GRNs
labelled by the ionotropic receptor Ir94e; these neurons have been
identified previously in the electron microscopy volume23. Ir94e neurons
respond to low salt concentrations and the presentation of male
genitals, among other substances31,38, and are suggested to play a role
in mediating attraction to low salt31. However, the role they play in proboscis
extension has not been described. Notably, the computational
model predicted that activation of Ir94e GRNs, rather than promoting
MN9 firing, inhibits MN9 firing (Fig. 3c). Therefore, we tested whether
optogenetic activation of Ir94e GRNs is sufficient to inhibit proboscis
extension, similar to bitter activation. Indeed, we found that optogenetic
activation of Ir94e GRNs or bitter GRNs was sufficient to inhibit
the proboscis extension to 50 mM sucrose, as our modelling predicted
(Fig. 3d,e). Interestingly, we noted a quantitative difference between
the model’s predictions for bitter versus Ir94e activation. Strong bitter
activation is predicted to eliminate MN9 firing to strong sugar stimulation,
but strong activation of Ir94e neurons is not predicted to do so
(Fig. 3b,c). We therefore tested the proboscis extension response (PER)
to 1 M sucrose while optogenetically activating bitter or Ir94e GRNs.
Optogenetic bitter activation eliminated consumption of 1 M sucrose
(Fig. 3d), but Ir94e activation did not (Fig. 3e). Thus, we conclude that
Ir94e GRN activity inhibits proboscis extension, but fails to fully inhibit
proboscis extension to strong sugar stimuli. These results indicate
that our computational model can predict previously unknown circuit
functions and properties.
Finally, we sought to predict how water taste detection influences
feeding initiation. The degree to which sugar GRNs and water GRNs
activate pathways that are distinct or shared is unknown. We found
that activation of water GRNs in our model activates many downstream
neurons that are also activated by sugar stimulation. (Fig. 3f, Fig. 4a and
Supplementary Tables 1 and 6). In particular, comparing neurons activated
by sugar GRNs with those activated by water GRNs, at a stimulation
frequency at which each pathway activates MN9 at 40 Hz, predicted
that the sugar pathway activates 377 neurons, while the water pathway
activates 391 neurons. Of these, more than half (250), are shared
between the two circuits (Fig. 3f and Supplementary Table 4). We also
examined bitter responsive neurons and Ir94e responsive neurons at
the minimal activation sufficient to reduce 40 Hz MN9 firing to 1 Hz.
Only two neurons were common between sugar and bitter activation,
and 30 between sugar and Ir94e activation, demonstrating segregation
of neurons activated by aversive and appetitive taste (Fig. 3f). This
prediction is consistent with our previous calcium imaging experiments
demonstrating that, across nine sugar-responsive cell types,
zero respond to a mixture of bitter compounds4. In contrast, our model
predicts central neurons that respond to both sugar and water taste
activation, as well as sugar-specific and water-specific neurons, consistent
with brainwide calcium imaging studies29,46.
To identify interneurons that compose the water feeding initiation
circuit, we used the computational model to analyze the
water-responsive neurons that influence MN9 activity. We stimulated
the top 200 neurons that are predicted to respond to water, and identified
the subset that computationally activates MN9 (Fig. 4b). Next,
we also computationally activated water-sensing GRNs, silenced each
water-responsive neuron, and monitored the change in MN9 activity
(Fig. 4c and Extended Data Fig. 2d). Using our computational model,
we identified 39 water-responsive neurons that are also sufficient for
MN9 activation. Of these 39, 30 are also predicted to be activated by
sugar GRNs (Extended Data Fig. 2d). Furthermore, we identify nine
neurons predicted to be both necessary and sufficient for water feeding
initiation (Extended Data Fig. 2e). As with sugar, we defined a neuron
predicted to be required for water feeding initiation as any neuron
that, when silenced, caused MN9 firing to be less than 80% of that of
the unsilenced control.
To test these predictions experimentally, we performed calcium
imaging on two neurons predicted to respond to water: Fudog and
Zorro. We found that both neurons indeed responded to water
(Extended Data Figs. 1c and 3a). Additionally, we examined six neurons
predicted to have water silencing phenotypes. Five of these, when
silenced optogenetically, indeed decreased significantly proboscis
extension to water, while a sixth, G2N-1, did not (Fig. 4d and Extended
Data Fig. 3b,c). We also examined five neurons that respond to computational
water activation, but are not predicted to cause a water
silencing phenotype. Of these five neurons, four did not have a water
silencing phenotype, as predicted, although one, Usnea, did decrease
proboscis extension significantly when silenced with GtACR1 (Fig. 4d
and Extended Data Fig. 3b,c).
Our computational model predicts that the water and sugar pathways
share a common set of neurons (Extended Data Fig. 2d,e). Do these
shared neurons contribute to feeding initiation? Our calcium imaging
experiments (Extended Data Figs. 1c and 3a) combined with previous
experiments4 confirm that five neurons predicted to respond to sugar
and water do respond to both sugar and water in vivo: Clavicle, Fudog,
Phantom, Rattle and Zorro. Moreover, four of these neurons had been
shown previously to be sufficient for proboscis extension, and three
are also required for sugar feeding initiation4. All three are among the
neurons we found experimentally to be required for feeding initiation
to water, as predicted (Fig. 4d). Furthermore, the two other cell types we
found experimentally to be required for water—Bract and Roundup—are
also predicted to respond to both water and sugar (Supplementary
Tables 1 and 6), and have been found to respond to sugar4. However,
previous calcium imaging studies did not identify water responses in
these two cell types4. This discrepancy may reflect the greater sensitivity
of the behavioural silencing experiments compared with calcium
imaging of water responses4. Finally, a further cell type, Usnea, has
been shown to respond to water, but not sugar4; our model correctly
predicts Usnea responds to water, but incorrectly predicts that it will
also respond to sugar. Usnea has previously been shown to be required
for feeding initiation to sugar, and our Amontillado RNAi experiments
indicate that it may be neuropeptidergic. We find that it is also required
for proboscis extension to water (Fig. 4d). Usnea synapses directly onto
both sugar and water GRNs (Extended Data Fig. 1b), and may tune the
response of these neurons. Thus, we identify a set of neurons involved
in the processing of both sugar and water.
To explore the relationship between the water and sugar pathways,
we computationally activated both sugar and water GRNs simultaneously
and examined the effect on MN9. Our computational modelling
predicts that activation of water and sugar GRNs work synergistically
to promote MN9 firing (Fig. 4e and Extended Data Fig. 3d). If sugar
and water do act synergistically, then both sugar GRNs and water
GRNs may be involved in water consumption. Only water GRNs have
been implicated in proboscis extension to water; we asked whether
sugar GRNs might also be required. Indeed, silencing of sugar GRNs
reduced the fraction of flies that extended their proboscis to water
(Fig. 4f and Extended Data Fig. 3e). Further, silencing water-sensing
neurons reduced consumption of 50 mM sucrose, although a confound
is that these water-sensing neurons are known to respond to
this concentration of sucrose (Extended Data Fig. 3f). In total, our
computational modelling, optogenetic behaviour experiments and
functional imaging indicate that the water and sugar pathways share, at
least in part, common components to form an appetitive consumption
pathway.
To test the general applicability of the computational model to
study sensorimotor processing, we sought to determine whether it
could predict circuit properties in another system—the well-studied
antennal grooming circuit6–10. In this system, activation of a set of
mechanosensory neurons in the Johnston’s organ—a chordotonal
organ in the antennae—elicits grooming of the antennae8,47 (Fig. 5a).
These mechanosensory neurons, abbreviated JONs, synapse onto two
interneuron types, named antennal grooming brain interneurons 1
and 2 (aBN1 and aBN2), which in turn synapse onto two descending
neurons, aDN1 and aDN2 (ref. 8). There is a single aBN1 per hemisphere,
while there are several aBN2 neurons per hemisphere. Each of these
cell types—aBN1, aBN2, aDN1 and aDN2—are sufficient for antennal
grooming, while aBN1 and aBN2 are each at least partially required
for antennal grooming8.
We first sought to test whether the computational model could
identify the previously described neurons in the circuit. We activated
a set of 147 previously identified JONs of the JO-C, JO-E, JO-F and JO-m
subclasses8,47. Indeed, the model identified that aBN1, aBN2, aDN1 and
aDN2 respond to JON activation (Fig. 5b and Supplementary Table 5). To
determine which of these JON-responsive neurons might drive antennal
grooming, we computationally activated these neurons and asked
whether they could elicit activity in either of the two descending neurons
that evoke antennal grooming: aDN1 or aDN2 (Fig. 5c and Extended
Data Fig. 4a). Next, we asked, among the top neurons predicted to
respond to JON activation, which are required for activation of aDN1 or
aDN2 (Fig. 5d and Extended Data Fig. 4b). Notably, only four neurons,
beyond aDN1 itself, were identified that could elicit aDN1 activity: aBN1,
aDN2 and two other neurons that elicited less than 2 Hz aDN1 activity
(Fig. 5c and Supplementary Table 7). Moreover, only three neurons,
besides aDN1 itself, were identified that reduced aDN1 activity by more
than 20% at 140 Hz JON activation: aBN1; a descending member of the
BN2 class; and aDN2 (Fig. 5d–f). Thus, the computational model identifies
members of each of the previously identified critical nodes of
the antennal grooming circuit purely from knowledge of the sensory
inputs and descending outputs.
We next tested how different JON subpopulations influence antennal
grooming. JONs send their projections to the antennal mechanosensory
and motor center in the ventral brain. JO-C and JO-E neurons respond
to antennal vibrations and project medially into the antennal mechanosensory
and motor center, while JO-F neurons project into a distinct
region8. Optogenetic activation of both JO-CE and JO-F neurons
is sufficient to trigger antennal grooming, but it is not known whether
these two populations generate distinct patterns of downstream firing.
Both JO-CE and JO-F neurons synapse onto aBN1 (103 and 78 synapses,
respectively; Fig. 5g), raising the possibility that they elicit grooming
by activating aBN1.
Our computational model predicts that, whereas JO-CE neurons will
elicit robust aBN1 activity, JO-F neurons will not, despite synapsing
directly onto aBN1 (Fig. 5g). To test this prediction, we optogenetically
activated each population of JONs and performed calcium imaging in
aBN1. Consistent with the prediction of this model, JO-CE activated
aBN1 robustly, but JO-F neurons did not (Fig. 5h). Why do JO-F neurons
fail to activate aBN1 robustly? We identified three putative inhibitory
neurons that are directly postsynaptic to JO-F neurons and synapse
directly onto aBN1. Computational silencing of these three neurons
permits JO-F neurons to activate aBN1, but this remains to be tested
empirically (Extended Data Fig. 4c,d). Our analysis of the antennal
grooming circuit demonstrates that our computational model can
provide insights into complex circuits, purely from knowledge of sensory
input and descending output. We demonstrate that modelling
brain circuits purely from connectivity and neurotransmitter identity
is sufficient to reliably describe, at least at a coarse level, entire sensorimotor
transformations.
In conclusion, we report a computational model on the basis of
connectivity and neurotransmitter predictions of the entire fly connectome
that can predict circuit neural activity, the neurons required
for activation of output neurons and the integration of several sensory
modalities. We use the model to create predictions of the sugar,
water, bitter and Ir94e pathways and validate many of these predictions
experimentally. We show that the Ir94e neurons, previously considered
to be attractive, instead inhibit proboscis extension. The results of our
modelling indicate that sugar, bitter and Ir94e GRNs activate generally
distinct populations of neurons. In contrast, sugar and water GRNs
activate many of the same central neurons as well as sugar-specific
and water-specific neurons. In addition, we recapitulate the antennal
grooming circuit purely from sensory input and descending output,
and identify a subpopulation of JONs that, despite strong connectivity
onto aBN1, fail to activate it. These studies demonstrate the power of
computational modelling to explain sensory processing features in
complex networks.
Our analysis of the taste and antennal grooming circuits shows we
can model local sensorimotor transformations in the taste and antennal
grooming circuits. The computational model, implemented in the
widely used Brian2 library22, allows for perturbations that are easily
interpreted. We believe our computational model will be a useful tool
for the study of sensorimotor transformations and the exploration
of interactions between overlapping neural pathways (for example,
sweet-bitter, sweet-water and so on).
Connectome models
We implement here a brainwide leaky integrate-and-fire model—
one of the simplest biologically plausible neural models. The recent
creation of connectome datasets has also coincided with methods
to model these connectomes. Two different approaches have been
used thus far to analyze the recent Drosophila hemibrain and larval
connectomes13,16. First, graph theoretical approaches, such as the
probabilistic graph traversal model13, or the signal cascade approach16
can be used to model information flow in the Drosophila brain. These
models estimate the path length from one neuron to another on the
basis of probabilistic traversal through the connectome depending
on connection strength13,16. However, because these models measure
traversal length, rather than a measure of activation, they are unlikely
to be useful for predicting what neurons contribute most to a given
circuit. A second approach is to train a deep neural network to perform
a task, and measure how neurons in that model compare with
actual neurons in the brain15,48. However, these approaches generally
use markedly more free parameters (for example, 734 in the case of
ref. 15), and need a clearly defined behavioural task.
In contrast to these approaches, our computational model generates
an intuitive readout, changes in spiking rates of neurons, with
no training of the model necessary. The model permits hypotheses
about the function of particular neurons, and allows for modelling of
the interactions of circuits that were previously studied only in isolation.
For example, by activating neurons involved in locomotion
simultaneously with sugar-sensing neurons, which are known to inhibit
locomotion, Sapkal et al. use our computational model to correctly
identify neurons that regulate walking, thereby identifying circuits
involved in foraging49.
What are the requirements for our model to make accurate predictions,
and what circuits or conditions might result in poor modelling?
Our model failed to predict behavioural results in the SEZ split-GAL4
screen (Fig. 2) when the neurons tested were predicted to be inhibitory
(that is, Tentacular or Phantom) or neuromodulatory (Usnea).
We conclude that circuits in which there is extensive basal inhibition,
not captured by the model because of the zero basal firing rate, may
be poorly simulated in our model. Further, circuits with extensive
neuromodulation or extrasynaptic signalling will be poorly modelled.
This is consistent with recent studies showing that activity propagation
measured by calcium imaging is not well predicted by anatomical connectivity
alone in Caenorhabditis elegans, demonstrating the importance
of extrasynaptic signalling not accounted for in our model50.
Finally, precise dynamics may be poorly simulated by our computational
model, although a similar LIF model accurately produced
Drosophila ring attractor dynamics18.
Drosophila taste coding
Our computational and experimental results generate new contributions
to our understanding of Drosophila taste coding. First, we identify
that sugar and water form a shared attractive pathway. We have found
previously that hunger impinges primarily at sugar-sensing neurons,
and at select second-order neurons; water-sensing neurons also are
tuned by thirst4. By altering the tuning of water- or sugar-sensing
neurons at the periphery, followed by funnelling their activity onto a
shared appetitive circuit, the Drosophila brain may allow for a compact
representation of attractive tastants. We also find that Ir94e is an aversive
taste modality; Ir94e GRNs in virgin females have been shown to
respond to the presentation of male genitals38. Additionally, we find that
bitter and Ir94e inhibit proboscis extension by impinging on pre-MNs.
A strength of computational modelling in general is that it is
explicit about its assumptions and limitations. In this simple leaky
integrate-and-fire model, we treat each neuron identically as a spiking
neuron and ignore neural morphology as well as different neurotransmitter
receptor dynamics17. Furthermore, the model does not account
for gap junctions, non-spiking neurons, internal state or long-range
neuropeptides, and assumes that the basal firing of each neuron is
zero51–55. In addition, the accuracy of the model is limited by the underlying
synapse and neurotransmitter prediction accuracy3,21. Moreover,
studies of the connectomes of C. elegans and the crustacean stomatogastric
ganglion demonstrate that connectivity knowledge constrains,
but does not dictate, a particular circuit mechanism56–58. Despite these
limitations, the model performs remarkably well for the demonstrated
use cases. Across 164 predictions we were able to test empirically, 91%
were consistent with our empirical results (Supplementary Table 9).
Excluding our optogenetic split-GAL4 experiments (Fig. 2), in which the
vast majority of cell types did not elicit MN9 activation, the accuracy
of the model is 84% (Supplementary Table 10). Further refinements of
our computational model, for example, more complete neurotransmitter
or receptor information, or more sophisticated treatment of
the morphology of each neuron, may improve the accuracy of future
models. We show here that, in the intermediate complexity of the entire
Drosophila brain, a simple connectome-based computational model
can reliably describe entire sensorimotor transformations from sensory
input to descending or motor output.