A catalogue of neuronal cell types has often been called a ‘parts list’ of the brain1,
and regarded as a prerequisite for understanding brain function2,3. In the optic lobe
of Drosophila, rules of connectivity between cell types have already proven to be
essential for understanding fly vision4,5. Here we analyse the fly connectome to
complete the list of cell types intrinsic to the optic lobe, as well as the rules governing
their connectivity. Most new cell types contain 10 to 100 cells, and integrate
information over medium distances in the visual field. Some existing type families
(Tm, Li, and LPi)6–10 at least double in number of types. A new serpentine medulla
(Sm) interneuron family contains more types than any other. Three families of crossneuropil
types are revealed. The consistency of types is demonstrated by analysing
the distances in high-dimensional feature space, and is further validated by
algorithms that select small subsets of discriminative features. We use connectivity
to hypothesize about the functional roles of cell types in motion, object and colour
vision. Connectivity with ‘boundary types’ that straddle the optic lobe and central
brain is also quantified. We showcase the advantages of connectomic cell typing:
complete and unbiased sampling, a rich array of features based on connectivity and
reduction of the connectome to a substantially simpler wiring diagram of cell types,
with immediate relevance for brain function and development.
Some of the greatest scientific discoveries of the twentieth century
concern the neural basis of sensory perception. Hubel and Wiesel’s
discovery of simple and complex cells in the visual cortex not only
entered neuroscience textbooks, but the hypothetical neuronal
wiring diagrams in their 1962 paper11 also inspired convolutional
nets12,13, which eventually ignited the deep-learning revolution
in artificial intelligence14. It may come as a surprise that directly
mapping such wiring diagrams, influential as they may be, has
been highly challenging or even impossible in mammalian brains.
Progress is being made by visual physiologists15–17, and the reconstruction
of a column of visual cortex from electron microscopy
images is also becoming feasible18,19. These are tiny slivers of visual
systems; scaling up to the full complexity of mammalian vision is still
aspirational.
To imagine the future of visual neuroscience, it is helpful to extrapolate
from a brain of a more modest size—that of the fly. Especially over
the past 15 years, visual neural circuits have been intensively investigated
in Drosophila4 with great progress in understanding the perception
of motion5,10, colour20 and objects21, as well as the role of vision in
complex behaviours like courtship22. The release of a neuronal wiring
diagram of a Drosophila brain23–25 poses an unprecedented opportunity.
The first wiring diagram for a whole brain contains as a corollary the
first wiring diagram for an entire visual system, as well as all the wiring
connecting the visual system with the rest of the brain.
About 38,500 neurons are intrinsic to the right optic lobe of the
reconstructed Drosophila brain (Extended Data Fig. 1a). The full wiring
diagram for these neurons is too complex to comprehend or even visualize.
It is essential to reduce complexity by describing the connectivity
between types of cells. For example, the roughly 800 ommatidia in
the compound eye send photoreceptor axons to roughly 800 L1 cells
in the lamina, which in turn connect with around 800 Mi1 cells. That
is a lot of cells and connections, but they can all be described by the
simple rules that photoreceptors connect to L1, and L1 connects to Mi1.
Some such rules are known7,26–30, but this knowledge is fragmentary
and incomplete.
Here we exhaustively enumerate all cell types intrinsic to the optic
lobe, and find all rules of connection between them. We effectively collapse
38,500 intrinsic neurons onto just 227 types, a reduction of more
than 150×. The wiring diagram is reduced from a 38,500 × 38,500 matrix
to a 227 × 227 matrix, an even greater compression. We additionally
provide rules of connectivity between intrinsic types and 500 types of
boundary neurons (defined below), which have also been annotated25.
In our connectomic approach, a cell type is defined as a set of cells
with similar patterns of connectivity9, and such cells are expected to
share the same function2. By the same logic, cell types with similar patterns
of connectivity should have similar functions. This logic will be
used to generate hypotheses about the functions of newly discovered
cell types, as well as the previously known cell types for which functional
information has been lacking.
Class, family and type
Neurons intrinsic to the optic lobe are those with almost all of their
synapses inside the optic lobe (Methods), and are the main topic of this
study (Extended Data Fig. 1a). Moreover, there are boundary neurons
that straddle the optic lobe and the rest of the brain (Extended Data
Fig. 1b). Boundary neurons fall into several classes: visual projection
neurons (VPNs) project from the optic lobe to the central brain, visual
centrifugal neurons (VCNs) do the opposite and heterolateral neurons
extend from one optic lobe to the other while making few or no synapses
in the central brain. Targets of boundary neurons in the central brain
are generally multimodal and/or sensorimotor24, mixing information
coming from the eyes and other sense organs, so we regard the optic
lobe proper as the fly’s visual system.
The brain of a single Drosophila adult female was reconstructed by
the FlyWire Consortium24,31. We proofread around 38,500 intrinsic
neurons in the right optic lobe (counts by type are shown in Extended
Data Table 1), as well as 3,900 VPNs, 250 VCNs, 150 heterolateral neurons
and 4,700 photoreceptor cells (left optic lobe numbers are shown in
the Methods). In total, 77% of the synapses of intrinsic neurons are with
other intrinsic neurons, and 23% are with boundary neurons.
We divide optic lobe intrinsic neurons into four broad classes: columnar,
local interneuron, cross-neuropil tangential and cross-neuropil
amacrine (Fig. 1a–c). Cells of the columnar class (Fig. 1a) have axons
oriented parallel to the main axis of the visual columns (‘axon’ is defined
in the Methods). Following a previous study6, the arbour of a columnar
neuron is allowed to be wider than a single column; what matters is
the orientation of the axon, not the aspect ratio of the arbour. Photoreceptor
cells are columnar but are not intrinsic to the optic lobe,
strictly speaking, because they enter from the retina. Nevertheless,
they will sometimes be included with intrinsic types in the following
analyses.
The optic lobe (Extended Data Fig. 1a,b) contains four main neuropils
(lamina, medulla, lobula and lobula plate) and a smaller fifth neuropil—
the accessory medulla (synapse counts by type family in each neuropil
are shown in Extended Data Table 2 and the number of cells in each
optic lobe is shown in Extended Data Table 3). We further distinguish
between distal and proximal medulla, regarding them as two separate
neuropils6 (Extended Data Fig. 1c). The border between them is layer
7 of the medulla (M7), which is also known as the serpentine layer6,32.
A columnar cell spans multiple neuropils (Fig. 1a). Cells of the local
interneuron class (Fig. 1b) are defined as being confined to a single
neuropil. We also define two classes that cross multiple neuropils but
are not columnar. A cross-neuropil tangential cell (Fig. 1c) has an axon
that is oriented perpendicular to the main axis of the visual columns as
it runs inside a neuropil. A cross-neuropil amacrine cell (Fig. 1c) lacks
an axon. Interneurons are typically amacrine, but sometimes have an
axon in the tangential orientation.
Each class is divided into families. A family is defined as a set of cells
that share the same neuropils (Fig. 1a–c and Methods). For example,
the Tm family projects from the distal medulla to the lobula, while the
TmY family projects from the distal medulla to both the lobula and
lobula plate (Fig. 1a; Tm and TmY pass through the proximal medulla,
and also typically receive inputs there).
Each family is divided into cell types. All 227 intrinsic types as well as
photoreceptor types are available for 3D interactive viewing at the Fly-
Wire Codex (https://codex.flywire.ai). Supplementary Data 1 includes
a list of all intrinsic types and their properties. Supplementary Data 2
contains one ‘card’ for each type, which includes its discriminative
logical predicate (see below), basic statistics, diagram showing stratification
and other single-cell anatomy, and 3D renderings of all the
cells in the type.
Most neurons in the optic lobe are columnar (Fig. 1e (right)), and half
of the families are columnar (Fig. 1e (left)). Interneurons constitute
just 17% of optic lobe intrinsic neurons, but the majority of cell types
(Fig. 1e (middle)). A columnar family (Tm) contains more cells than
any other family (Fig. 1f (right)). An interneuron family (Sm) contains
more types than any other family (Fig. 1f (left)).
The columnar families (Fig. 1a) are well known6. The Sm interneuron
family is new (Fig. 1b), and its name is inspired by its stratification in
the serpentine medulla (M7). Some of the cross-neuropil families are
wholly or almost wholly new (Fig. 1c). Over half of the cell types are
new, and many of these are interneuron types.
Connectomic approach to cell types
For each cell, we define an output feature vector by the number of
output synapses onto neurons of cell type t, which runs from 1 to T. The
output feature vector is a row of the cell-to-type connectivity matrix
(Methods). For each cell, we similarly define an input feature vector by
the number of input synapses received from neurons of cell type t. This
is a column of the type-to-cell connectivity matrix (Methods). The input
and output feature vectors are concatenated to form a 2T-dimensional
feature vector (Fig. 2a). The feature dimensions include only intrinsic
types, so T is 227.
A cell type is defined as a set of cells with similar feature vectors9.
Cells of the same type are near each other in feature space, while cells
of different types are far away (Fig. 2b). This was quantified using the
weighted Jaccard distance (hereafter, Jaccard distance; Methods).
Our definition of feature vectors requires that some cell types should
already exist. An initial set of cell types was defined by human analysts
using traditional morphological criteria (Methods). These traditional
cell types were used to compute feature vectors, and hierarchical clustering
was applied. In many cases, this led to further division into cell
types that could not be distinguished by traditional criteria. In other
cases, it led to grouping of morphological variants into a single type.
After splitting or merging types, the feature vectors were recomputed
and the process was continued iteratively.
The final cell types were validated in several ways (Methods). We
show that our clustering is self-consistent, in the sense that almost all
cells end up in the original cluster if we attempt to reassign each cell’s
feature vector to the nearest cluster. For more interpretable evaluations,
we construct compact connectivity-based discriminators that
can predict cell type membership (Extended Data Fig. 2 and Supplementary
Data 3). We show that membership can be accurately predicted
by a logical conjunction of on average five synaptic partner types. For
each interneuron type, we also provide selected pairs of features that
can be used to discriminate that type from others in the same neuropil
(Extended Data Fig. 3 and Supplementary Data 4).
Hierarchical clustering of cell types
We defined a connectomic cell type as a set of cells with similar feature
vectors based on connectivity. It follows that cells of the same type
should share the same function, according to the maxim “Nothing
defines the function of a neuron better than its connections”33. The
same maxim also implies that cell types with similar feature vectors
should have similar visual functions. A cell type feature vector can be
obtained by summing the feature vectors over all cells in that type, followed
by normalization (Methods). Computing the Jaccard distance
between all pairs of cell type feature vectors and applying average linkage
hierarchical clustering yields a dendrogram of cell types (Methods
and Fig. 2c). Thresholding the dendrogram yields a flat clustering
(Fig. 2c), which will be interpreted later on.
share the same function2. By the same logic, cell types with similar patterns
of connectivity should have similar functions. This logic will be
used to generate hypotheses about the functions of newly discovered
cell types, as well as the previously known cell types for which functional
information has been lacking.
Class, family and type
Neurons intrinsic to the optic lobe are those with almost all of their
synapses inside the optic lobe (Methods), and are the main topic of this
study (Extended Data Fig. 1a). Moreover, there are boundary neurons
that straddle the optic lobe and the rest of the brain (Extended Data
Fig. 1b). Boundary neurons fall into several classes: visual projection
neurons (VPNs) project from the optic lobe to the central brain, visual
centrifugal neurons (VCNs) do the opposite and heterolateral neurons
extend from one optic lobe to the other while making few or no synapses
in the central brain. Targets of boundary neurons in the central brain
are generally multimodal and/or sensorimotor24, mixing information
coming from the eyes and other sense organs, so we regard the optic
lobe proper as the fly’s visual system.
The brain of a single Drosophila adult female was reconstructed by
the FlyWire Consortium24,31. We proofread around 38,500 intrinsic
neurons in the right optic lobe (counts by type are shown in Extended
Data Table 1), as well as 3,900 VPNs, 250 VCNs, 150 heterolateral neurons
and 4,700 photoreceptor cells (left optic lobe numbers are shown in
the Methods). In total, 77% of the synapses of intrinsic neurons are with
other intrinsic neurons, and 23% are with boundary neurons.
We divide optic lobe intrinsic neurons into four broad classes: columnar,
local interneuron, cross-neuropil tangential and cross-neuropil
amacrine (Fig. 1a–c). Cells of the columnar class (Fig. 1a) have axons
oriented parallel to the main axis of the visual columns (‘axon’ is defined
in the Methods). Following a previous study6, the arbour of a columnar
neuron is allowed to be wider than a single column; what matters is
the orientation of the axon, not the aspect ratio of the arbour. Photoreceptor
cells are columnar but are not intrinsic to the optic lobe,
strictly speaking, because they enter from the retina. Nevertheless,
they will sometimes be included with intrinsic types in the following
analyses.
The optic lobe (Extended Data Fig. 1a,b) contains four main neuropils
(lamina, medulla, lobula and lobula plate) and a smaller fifth neuropil—
the accessory medulla (synapse counts by type family in each neuropil
are shown in Extended Data Table 2 and the number of cells in each
optic lobe is shown in Extended Data Table 3). We further distinguish
between distal and proximal medulla, regarding them as two separate
neuropils6 (Extended Data Fig. 1c). The border between them is layer
7 of the medulla (M7), which is also known as the serpentine layer6,32.
A columnar cell spans multiple neuropils (Fig. 1a). Cells of the local
interneuron class (Fig. 1b) are defined as being confined to a single
neuropil. We also define two classes that cross multiple neuropils but
are not columnar. A cross-neuropil tangential cell (Fig. 1c) has an axon
that is oriented perpendicular to the main axis of the visual columns as
it runs inside a neuropil. A cross-neuropil amacrine cell (Fig. 1c) lacks
an axon. Interneurons are typically amacrine, but sometimes have an
axon in the tangential orientation.
Each class is divided into families. A family is defined as a set of cells
that share the same neuropils (Fig. 1a–c and Methods). For example,
the Tm family projects from the distal medulla to the lobula, while the
TmY family projects from the distal medulla to both the lobula and
lobula plate (Fig. 1a; Tm and TmY pass through the proximal medulla,
and also typically receive inputs there).
Each family is divided into cell types. All 227 intrinsic types as well as
photoreceptor types are available for 3D interactive viewing at the Fly-
Wire Codex (https://codex.flywire.ai). Supplementary Data 1 includes
a list of all intrinsic types and their properties. Supplementary Data 2
contains one ‘card’ for each type, which includes its discriminative
logical predicate (see below), basic statistics, diagram showing stratification
and other single-cell anatomy, and 3D renderings of all the
cells in the type.
Most neurons in the optic lobe are columnar (Fig. 1e (right)), and half
of the families are columnar (Fig. 1e (left)). Interneurons constitute
just 17% of optic lobe intrinsic neurons, but the majority of cell types
(Fig. 1e (middle)). A columnar family (Tm) contains more cells than
any other family (Fig. 1f (right)). An interneuron family (Sm) contains
more types than any other family (Fig. 1f (left)).
The columnar families (Fig. 1a) are well known6. The Sm interneuron
family is new (Fig. 1b), and its name is inspired by its stratification in
the serpentine medulla (M7). Some of the cross-neuropil families are
wholly or almost wholly new (Fig. 1c). Over half of the cell types are
new, and many of these are interneuron types.
Connectomic approach to cell types
For each cell, we define an output feature vector by the number of
output synapses onto neurons of cell type t, which runs from 1 to T. The
output feature vector is a row of the cell-to-type connectivity matrix
(Methods). For each cell, we similarly define an input feature vector by
the number of input synapses received from neurons of cell type t. This
is a column of the type-to-cell connectivity matrix (Methods). The input
and output feature vectors are concatenated to form a 2T-dimensional
feature vector (Fig. 2a). The feature dimensions include only intrinsic
types, so T is 227.
A cell type is defined as a set of cells with similar feature vectors9.
Cells of the same type are near each other in feature space, while cells
of different types are far away (Fig. 2b). This was quantified using the
weighted Jaccard distance (hereafter, Jaccard distance; Methods).
Our definition of feature vectors requires that some cell types should
already exist. An initial set of cell types was defined by human analysts
using traditional morphological criteria (Methods). These traditional
cell types were used to compute feature vectors, and hierarchical clustering
was applied. In many cases, this led to further division into cell
types that could not be distinguished by traditional criteria. In other
cases, it led to grouping of morphological variants into a single type.
After splitting or merging types, the feature vectors were recomputed
and the process was continued iteratively.
The final cell types were validated in several ways (Methods). We
show that our clustering is self-consistent, in the sense that almost all
cells end up in the original cluster if we attempt to reassign each cell’s
feature vector to the nearest cluster. For more interpretable evaluations,
we construct compact connectivity-based discriminators that
can predict cell type membership (Extended Data Fig. 2 and Supplementary
Data 3). We show that membership can be accurately predicted
by a logical conjunction of on average five synaptic partner types. For
each interneuron type, we also provide selected pairs of features that
can be used to discriminate that type from others in the same neuropil
(Extended Data Fig. 3 and Supplementary Data 4).
Hierarchical clustering of cell types
We defined a connectomic cell type as a set of cells with similar feature
vectors based on connectivity. It follows that cells of the same type
should share the same function, according to the maxim “Nothing
defines the function of a neuron better than its connections”33. The
same maxim also implies that cell types with similar feature vectors
should have similar visual functions. A cell type feature vector can be
obtained by summing the feature vectors over all cells in that type, followed
by normalization (Methods). Computing the Jaccard distance
between all pairs of cell type feature vectors and applying average linkage
hierarchical clustering yields a dendrogram of cell types (Methods
and Fig. 2c). Thresholding the dendrogram yields a flat clustering
(Fig. 2c), which will be interpreted later on.
connections. One that we have found to be helpful is to display the top
input and output connections of each type (Figs. 3–7 and Extended
Data Figs. 5 and 6). In such a graph, some nodes can have more than one
outgoing and/or more than one incoming connection. A few of these
nodes show up as ‘hubs’ with many visible connections. For example,
Mi1 is the top input to a large number of postsynaptic types (Fig. 3 and
Extended Data Fig. 5).
The nodes of the graph were positioned in 2D space by a graph
layout algorithm that tends to place strongly connected types close
together (Methods). It turns out that nearby nodes in the 2D graph
layout space tend to belong to the clusters that were extracted from
the high-dimensional connectivity-based feature vectors (compare
the node colourings of Fig. 3 with clusters of Fig. 2c).
We can also normalize the type-to-type connection matrix to be the
fraction of synapses from cell type s to cell type t. Depending on the
normalization, this could be the fraction of input to type t or fraction
of output from type s (Methods). Input and output fractions are shown
in Supplementary Data 5, and are equivalent to the cell type feature
vectors defined earlier. The heat maps of Supplementary Data 5 are
important because they show a much more complete set of connections
than the wiring diagrams, which are highly selective visualizations.
Perplexity as a measure of degree of connectivity
The degree of a cell type can be defined as the number of cell types to
which it is connected. Weak connections can be excluded from this
definition by thresholding the type-to-type connection matrix before
computing degree. For a threshold-independent measure, we instead
calculate a ‘perplexity’34 for each cell type. The outgoing connection
strengths (synapse counts) are normalized as if they were a probability
distribution, and out-perplexity is defined as the exponential of the
entropy of this distribution. Out-perplexity reduces to out-degree in
the special case that the distribution is uniform over the connected
partners. In-perplexity is defined analogously.
If intrinsic cell types are ranked by the product of out- and
in-perplexity (Extended Data Fig. 7a), then TmY5a is the most connected
hub, and various types in the lamina and distal medulla are the least
hub-like. Motion-related cell types generally do not have high perplexity.
Out-perplexity tends to be greater than in-perplexity (Extended
Data Fig. 7a), although they are positively correlated (Extended Data
Fig. 7b).
One might expect that ‘early’ types in visual processing would have
divergent connectivity, to distribute photoreceptor signals to many
targets, while ‘late’ types would have convergent connectivity, summarizing
the final results of optic lobe computations for use by the
central brain. This idea can be tested by ranking types according to the
ratio of out-perplexity to in-perplexity (Extended Data Fig. 8). Indeed,
the top of the list includes early types like the inner photoreceptors R7
and R8, L3 and L5, and many Dm and Pm interneuron types, and many
Sm types are near the bottom of the list; they can be interpreted as ‘late’
types given their extensive connectivity with VPNs.
The ‘numerous’ cell types
Photoreceptor axons project retinotopically from the eye to the
lamina (R1–6) and distal medulla (R7–8). The medulla is divided into
columns, which are presumed to be in one-to-one correspondence
with ommatidia of the compound eye. Cell types containing >720 cells
in our reconstruction (Fig. 1d), as well as photoreceptor types, will be
called ‘numerous’. The top end (800) of this range is probably the true
number of columns in this optic lobe. For each numerous type, the cells
appear to be distributed one per column (Supplementary Data 2), and
the true number of cells is expected to approximate 800. The observed
cell numbers are mostly smaller than 800; some cells are missing from
columns, presumably due to under-recovery of cells by proofreading
(Methods). The connections between numerous types agree well with
a previous reconstruction of seven medulla columns27 (Methods and
Extended Data Fig. 9).
The 28 numerous types have long been known6. At the other extreme,
16 types contain only a single cell. Most types (183) lie between the
extremes (Fig. 1g and Extended Data Fig. 1d). It is the less numerous
types of which our knowledge has been incomplete, and arguably
they are where much of the magic of vision happens. As with the
photoreceptors, neural activity in the numerous cell types like L1 and
Mi1 mostly encodes information about the image at or near single
points in visual space. But perception requires the integration of information
from points that can be quite distant from each other, and this
is done by the larger neurons that belong to the less numerous types.
For most of the numerous types, visual responses have been observed
previously4, and will be used to interpret the dendrogram of Fig. 2c. We
will see that the numerous types that belong to a single cluster have
similar functions, which enables us to ascribe a function to each cluster
as a whole. In other words, we extrapolate from the functions of the
numerous types to yield preliminary clues regarding the functions of
the less-numerous types.
These extrapolations are speculative, and are merely starting points
for hypothesis generation and experimental research, and the clusters
are not set in stone. They were obtained by thresholding a hierarchical
clustering (Fig. 2c), and adjusting this threshold will change the number
of clusters (Extended Data Fig. 10). Rather than use our clusterings,
some readers may prefer to directly consult the weighted Jaccard distances
between types (Fig. 2, Source Data), from which the clusterings
were derived. Other cautionary notes about the clusters are given in
the Methods and Discussion. These caveats notwithstanding, we next
proceed to functional interpretation of the clusters in Fig. 2c.
ON, OFF and luminance channels
Cluster 10 and cluster 11 (Fig. 2c) both receive strong input from photoreceptors
R1–6 (Extended Data Fig. 11), and we propose that they
are regarded as OFF and ON channels, respectively, carrying information
about light decrements (OFF stimuli) and light increments (ON
stimuli). Our concept is similar to the well-known ON and OFF motion
pathways35,36, but differs because our ON and OFF channels are general
purpose, feeding into the object and colour subsystems as well as the
motion subsystem.
Cluster 10 contains the OFF cells L2, L4, Tm1, Tm2 and Tm4. Cluster
11 contains the ON cells L5, Mi1 and Tm3, and also the OFF cell L1. It
makes sense to assign L1 to the ON channel even though it is an OFF cell,
because L1 is inhibitory/glutamatergic, so its effects on downstream
partners are similar to those of an ON excitatory cell. Note that information
about whether synapses are excitatory or inhibitory was not
used by our clustering algorithm. Cluster 11 also contains C2 and C3,
which are expected to be ON cells because their top inputs are L1 and
L5. A companion paper argues that the various Dm interneuron types
in cluster 10 and cluster 11 normalize the activities of numerous types
in the OFF and ON channels37.
The ON and OFF motion pathways were traditionally defined by working
backwards from the T4 and T5 motion detectors, which respectively
compute the directions of moving ON and OFF stimuli4,5. The ON
motion pathway is directly upstream from T4 and includes Mi1, Mi4,
Mi9 and Tm3. The OFF motion pathway is directly upstream from T5
and includes Tm1, Tm2, Tm4 and Tm9. Figure 4 shows that these cell
types have other strong targets besides T4/T5, so they do not seem
to be solely or chiefly dedicated to motion (see below concerning the
lone exception Tm9).
L3 connectivity is sufficiently unique that it stands apart from all
of the other cell types as a cluster containing only the single type L3
(Fig. 2c). This is consistent with current thinking that L3 constitutes a
separate luminance channel, distinct from ON and OFF channels38. L3
is the only L type with a sustained rather than transient response39, and
it encodes luminance rather than contrast40.
Cluster 7 includes Dm4, Dm9, Dm12, Dm20 and Mi9, which all have
L3 as their strongest input. Mi9 is also the strongest output of L3 and,
like L3, exhibits a sustained response41. We therefore propose that
cluster 7 should be lumped with L3 in a hypothetical luminance channel.
Mi9 is traditionally grouped in the ON motion pathway, but Mi9
is an input to the object and colour subsystems, not only the motion
subsystem. It is less obvious whether the remaining types in cluster 7
(Mi15, Dm2, Dm10 and Sm05) should be grouped in the luminance
channel. Indeed, these types break off into a separate clusters when
the threshold is adjusted to refine the flat clustering (Extended Data
Fig. 10). These types might alternatively be assigned to the colour subsystem
as Mi15 and Dm2 are known to receive direct input from inner
photoreceptor R842.
Lawf2 is a cluster of its own. By targeting cell types (L5, C2 and C3 in
Supplementary Data 5) in cluster 11, Lawf2 provides centrifugal feedback
to the ON channel (Extended Data Fig. 11). However, the strongest
output of Lawf2 is Lai (Fig. 4), which is thought to mediate lateral
inhibition in the lamina43 through pathways such as R1–6→Lai→R1–6
and R1–6→Lai→L326. Lawf2 may therefore modulate lateral interactions
mediated by Lai. The strongest input to Lawf2 is OA-AL2b2, which could
be octopaminergic or cholinergic44,45. If it is octopaminergic, this input
could be the source of the previously reported octopaminergic gain
modulation of Lawf2 neurons46. Lawf2 also receives strong input from
cluster 9, which is hypothesized to be an object subsystem later on.
Lai and Lawf1, the two types in cluster 8, have similar targets (L3,
T1, R1–6 and L2). Cluster 8 provides centrifugal feedback to the OFF
channel (through L2) and to R1–6 (Extended Data Fig. 11). Alternatively,
cluster 8 could be interpreted as being part of the luminance channel, as
cluster 7 is a strong input and L3 a strong output (Extended Data Fig. 11).
Motion
The motion-detecting T4 and T5 families belong to cluster 15 (Fig. 2c).
Cluster 16 contains CT1 and Tm9, which are well known to be important
for motion computation4,5. It makes sense to regard Tm9 as dedicated
to the motion subsystem rather than part of a general-purpose OFF
channel, as 80% of its output synapses are onto CT1 or T5. Cluster 16
also includes Li14, an interneuron type with T5a as the strongest input,
and T5a through T5d as the strongest outputs. T4/T5 neurons synapse
onto VPNs that exit the optic lobe and enter the central brain (Fig. 5a
and Supplementary Data 5).
Cluster 13 and cluster 14 contain the lobula plate interneuron family,
LPi1 through LPi156,8. Over half of these are new (Methods). Some
LPi types consist of one or two cells that cover the entire visual field
(Fig. 5b). Two LPi types may stratify in the same lobula plate layers,
but consist of cells with different sizes (Fig. 5c). Most LPi types are
amacrine, but some exhibit axo-dendritic polarization (Fig. 5d). Some
types collectively cover only a portion of the visual field (for example,
LPi01 and LPi03 are ventral only; Supplementary Data 2).
All LPi types receive input from T4/T5 types, so it is clear that cluster
13 and cluster 14 are related to motion vision. All LPi types receive
input from T4/T5 cells with a single preferred direction (Fig. 5a and Supplementary
Data 5). The only exception is LPi07, which receives inputs
from T4/T5 cells with preferred directions c and d (Supplementary
Data 5). LPi types synapse onto other LPi types and onto VPNs (Fig. 5a
and Supplementary Data 5).
Cluster 13 also contains columnar neurons from three Y types and
all Tlp types. All of these are predicted to be glutamatergic, and are
reciprocally connected with T4/T5 of particular preferred directions.
The only exception is Tlp5, which receives input only from T4a/T5a.
The Y and Tlp types also connect with LPi and columnar VPN types10.
TmY20 and Am1 also belong to cluster 13, and were previously identified
to be motion related10.
Objects
Cluster 9 includes the numerous types T2 and T3, which have been
implicated in the detection of small objects47. Their downstream VPN
partners LC1147 and LC1848 (Fig. 6) are also activated by small objects.
On the basis of this information, we propose that cluster 9 is part of
a hypothetical object subsystem (Fig. 6). Cluster 9 (Fig. 2c) includes
many other types from columnar families (Mi, TmY, Y), interneuron
families (Li and Pm) and cross-neuropil tangential and amacrine families
(LMa, LMt, MLt, PDt). Downstream targets include LC, LPLC and
LT types (Fig. 6).
Mi1 and Tm1 are the most prominent inputs to the subsystem (Fig. 6),
and respectively belong to the ON and OFF channels defined above.
They are top inputs to T3, explaining why T3 is ON–OFF47. T2 is ON–OFF
because its top inputs are L5 and Tm2, which respectively belong to the
ON and OFF channels. Note that the Tm1 input to T2 and the L5 input
to T2 are second from the top, and therefore do not show up in Fig. 6,
which is restricted to the top inputs and outputs.
Several types are nearby T2 and T3 in the cell types dendrogram
(Fig. 2c). In particular, T2a, Tm21, Tm25, Tm27, TmY3 and Y3 are fairly
numerous and excitatory, so we regard them as candidate object detectors.
Despite its name, T2a is more similar to T3 in connectivity than to
T2 (Fig. 2c). T2a also receives Mi1 and Tm1 input like T3, and is predicted
to be ON–OFF. The top output of T2a is LC17, which is known to be activated
by small objects49 and also receives input from T3.
Cluster 12 contains Li19 and Li25 (Fig. 2c). Cluster 9 is both a strong
input to cluster 12 (Extended Data Fig. 11) and a strong output of cluster
12 (Extended Data Fig. 11), largely due to connections between Tm21
and Cluster12. We therefore include cluster 12 as well as cluster 9 in the
object subsystem.
Colour and polarization
The inner photoreceptors R7 and R8 are important for Drosophila
colour vision because their responses are more narrowly tuned to the
wavelength of light than those of the outer photoreceptors R1–6. R7
prefers ultraviolet light, whereas R8 prefers blue or green light20.
Cluster 4 contains Dm8a, Dm8b, Dm11 and DmDRA2, which are all
inner photoreceptor targets42. Cluster 1 contains most of the remaining
types so far implicated in colour vision. As originally defined by
morphology6, Tm5 is a potential postsynaptic target of the inner photoreceptors
because it stratifies in the distal medulla at the M7 border
and also in the M3. These are the medulla layers containing the axon
terminals of R7 and R87. We found that Tm5 consists of six cell types
(Fig. 7a). Three of our connectomic Tm5 types correspond to canonical
Tm5 types that were previously defined by morphology and Ort
expression7,50. Tm5a and Tm5b receive R7 input, while Tm5c receives R8
input. Moreover, we found three new types, Tm5d, Tm5e and Tm5f, that
receive little or no photoreceptor input, although their stratifications
are similar to those of the canonical Tm5 types (Fig. 7a).
The correspondences between connectomic and morphologicalmolecular
Tm5 types were established using morphological criteria
(Methods). However, the reader should be cautioned that there is considerable
variability within a type, so reliably typing individual cells
based on morphology alone is difficult or impossible. Connectivity is
essential for reliable discriminations.
Tm5a and Tm5b receive R7 and Dm8 input, as expected from previous
reports42,50,51. Tm5c receives R8 input42,50, and also strong L3 input
(Fig. 7c and Supplementary Data 5). While some synapses from Dm8
to Tm5c do exist50, this connection seems to be weak.
Tm20 has been implicated in colour vision because it receives R8
input27,28,42. It also receives strong L3 input (Fig. 7c). Thus, Tm20 inputs
are similar to Tm5c inputs, consistent with the physiological finding
that these two types are more similar to each other in their chromatic
responses than they are to Tm5a and Tm5b52.
As Tm5a, Tm5b, Tm5c and Tm20 are known to be related to colour
vision, we propose that the rest of cluster 1 is also part of a hypothetical
colour subsystem (Fig. 7c). The new Tm5 types (Tm5d, Tm5e and Tm5f)
receive few or no synapses directly from photoreceptors, but Tm5d
receives indirect R7 input from Tm5b and Dm8a, Tm5e receives indirect
R8 input from Tm5c (Fig. 7c), and Tm5f receives indirect R8 input from
Tm20 (Supplementary Data 5). Tm5d and Tm5e are predicted to be
glutamatergic and Tm5f is predicted to be cholinergic.
We have defined Dm8a and Dm8b, which synapse onto Tm5a and
Tm5b, respectively (Fig. 7c), and this preference is highly selective
(Supplementary Data 5). As with Tm5, splitting Dm8 is straightforward
with connectivity but difficult or impossible with morphology.
How our two Dm8 types correspond with the two types previously
defined by molecular studies (yDm8 and pDm8)51,53 remains speculative
(Methods).
Cluster 1 also includes Tm7, Tm8a and Tm8b (another novel split),
Tm16 and wholly new types Tm31 to Tm37. The latter deviate from the
classical definition of the Tm family, which is supposed to project from
the distal medulla to the lobula6. These types mainly stratify in serpentine
medulla and lobula, with little or no presence in distal medulla
(Fig. 7b). Nevertheless, we decided to lump them into the Tm family.
Tm31 to Tm35 each contain relatively few (<100) cells, and are predicted
to not be cholinergic. This departs from the norm for existing Tm types,
which are generally more numerous (>100 cells) and predicted to be
cholinergic (exceptions are the three glutamatergic Tm5 types). Tm36
and Tm37 contain more than 100 cells each, and are predicted to be
cholinergic.
Cluster 1 includes TmY types, Li, Sm and Pm interneuron types, MLt
types and LLPt. Cluster 1 also includes Mi4 and Mi10. Mi4 was traditionally
regarded as part of the ON motion pathway, but T4 cells are
relatively weak outputs. Mi4 has strong partners in the colour and
object subsystems (Fig. 7c (yellow and green)). Its strongest output
is Mi9, which we have assigned to the luminance channel and is one
of the major inputs to the colour subsystem. This diversity of targets
shows that Mi4 is a major hub between multiple subsystems,
although it has been assigned by the clustering to a single subsystem.
Mi10 mediates a feedback loop L3→Mi9→Mi10→Lawf1→L3, so
it might seem to belong to the luminance channel, but the clustering
has placed it in cluster 1 because it is similar in connectivity
to Mi4.
Tm20 (Supplementary Data 5). Tm5d and Tm5e are predicted to be
glutamatergic and Tm5f is predicted to be cholinergic.
We have defined Dm8a and Dm8b, which synapse onto Tm5a and
Tm5b, respectively (Fig. 7c), and this preference is highly selective
(Supplementary Data 5). As with Tm5, splitting Dm8 is straightforward
with connectivity but difficult or impossible with morphology.
How our two Dm8 types correspond with the two types previously
defined by molecular studies (yDm8 and pDm8)51,53 remains speculative
(Methods).
Cluster 1 also includes Tm7, Tm8a and Tm8b (another novel split),
Tm16 and wholly new types Tm31 to Tm37. The latter deviate from the
classical definition of the Tm family, which is supposed to project from
the distal medulla to the lobula6. These types mainly stratify in serpentine
medulla and lobula, with little or no presence in distal medulla
(Fig. 7b). Nevertheless, we decided to lump them into the Tm family.
Tm31 to Tm35 each contain relatively few (<100) cells, and are predicted
to not be cholinergic. This departs from the norm for existing Tm types,
which are generally more numerous (>100 cells) and predicted to be
cholinergic (exceptions are the three glutamatergic Tm5 types). Tm36
and Tm37 contain more than 100 cells each, and are predicted to be
cholinergic.
Cluster 1 includes TmY types, Li, Sm and Pm interneuron types, MLt
types and LLPt. Cluster 1 also includes Mi4 and Mi10. Mi4 was traditionally
regarded as part of the ON motion pathway, but T4 cells are
relatively weak outputs. Mi4 has strong partners in the colour and
object subsystems (Fig. 7c (yellow and green)). Its strongest output
is Mi9, which we have assigned to the luminance channel and is one
of the major inputs to the colour subsystem. This diversity of targets
shows that Mi4 is a major hub between multiple subsystems,
although it has been assigned by the clustering to a single subsystem.
Mi10 mediates a feedback loop L3→Mi9→Mi10→Lawf1→L3, so
it might seem to belong to the luminance channel, but the clustering
has placed it in cluster 1 because it is similar in connectivity
to Mi4.
in Tlp4 (Fig. 8c,d). In the first stage of morphology-based classification,
these errant cells were assigned to Y11. But such pseudo-Y11 cells
were later reassigned to Tlp4 on the basis of connectivity. Their feature
vectors match Tlp4 because their medullary projections make
few synapses, and their connectivity in the lobula and lobula plate
matches Tlp4.
It is worth mentioning an unusual example in which ignoring morphological
variation is correct in one sense, but ultimately turns out to
be misleading. Three Li11 cells are annotated in the hemibrain reconstruction9,
and three corresponding cells can be identified in our optic
lobe25. We group two of these cells in one type (Fig. 8e). The third cell can
be paired with a fourth to form a pseudo-Li11 type with a small axonal
projection into the central brain (Fig. 8f). Although the axon is visually
striking, it has few synapses and therefore little impact on connectivity.
Thus, it might be tempting to ignore the axon as a developmental
‘accident’ and merge Li11 and pseudo-Li11 into a single type. But it turns
out that Li11 and pseudo-Li11 are distinct types, owing to their different
connectivity in the lobula. For example, Li25 has strong LT61 output,
while pseudo-Li11 has strong LT11 input. Pseudo-Li11 also exists in the
hemibrain (data not shown), although there it lacks the small projection.
So the central brain projection of pseudo-Li11 exhibits variability
across individuals, further evidence that it is a developmental accident.
We introduce the new names Li25 and Li19 to replace Li11 and
pseudo-Li11,
A few cells were dismissed as developmental accidents. This could be
done with high confidence when the cells were small and few in number.
However, we had difficulty deciding about Li29 because it was a full-field
cell in the lobula but it also extended a smaller secondary arbour into
the lobula plate (Supplementary Data 2). Originally, we decided that
this cell was a developmental accident, and did not include it in our
list of types. Later on, we found that this odd-looking cell is repeated
in the left optic lobe, and promoted it to a type.
Spatial coverage
All cell typing efforts must decide whether to split types more finely or
merge types more coarsely. We resolved this lumper–splitter dilemma
by using spatial coverage as a criterion2. As a general rule, the cells
of a cell type collectively cover all columns of the optic lobe with a
density that is fairly uniform across the visual field. This makes sense
for implementing translation-invariant computations, a strategy that
is commonly used in convolutional networks and other computer
vision algorithms. Uniform spatial coverage is sometimes called
‘tiling’, although cell type arbours often overlap so much that the analogy
to floor tiles is misleading. Spatial coverage is also a property of
many cell types in mammalian retina2,56.
In some types consisting of just one or a few cells, we identified an
unconventional jigsaw-style spatial coverage. For example, LPi14,
also known as LPi1-210, is a pair of full-field cells (Fig. 5b). We refer
to them as a jigsaw pair because they jointly cover the visual field in
an irregular manner, as if they were cut by a jigsaw. Jigsaw types can
also be found in other interneuron families and include Pm14, Li27
and Li28.
Our feature vector (Fig. 2a) includes no explicit information about
the spatial coordinates of a cell. Thus, if clustering feature vectors
results in cell types with good spatial coverage, that is an independent
validation of the clustering. Coverage also solves the lumper–splitter
dilemma. Suppose that we attempt to split one type into two candidate
types, based on hierarchical clustering. If both candidate types exhibit
good coverage, then we accept them as valid. If the cells of both candidate
types seem randomly scattered, that means our split is invalid,
because it is presumably discriminating between cells based on noise.
Chromatic types like Tm5 and Dm8 might seem to be an exception to
this rule, but their apparently random locations may turn out to depend
systematically on pale and yellow columns (Methods).
The above are easy cases, but there are also edge cases. Suppose that
splitting results in two candidate types that neatly cover the dorsal field
and the ventral field, respectively, without overlap. We then reject the
split, preferring to lump the two candidate types in a single type that
exhibits dorsoventral spatial variation in connectivity. On the other
hand, if one candidate type covers the dorsal field and the other covers
the full field, this is an acceptable split.
With these heuristics, some of our cell types end up with only
partial coverage of the visual field (Fig. 9). This is especially common
for boundary types. Sm is the intrinsic type family containing
the most types with partial coverage. This makes sense, given that
Sm cells interact closely with many boundary types arborizing in
the serpentine layer. Cell types with partial coverage make sense
in the later stages of vision. After the early stages of vision, computer
vision also often discards translation invariance and may
perform different visual computations in different regions of the
visual field.
Discussion
The connectomic approach to cell typing has three powers. First, it
is not subject to the incomplete and biased sampling that can affect
other methods. Second, connectivity turns out to provide a rich set
of features for distinguishing between cell types. Third, connectomic
cell typing not only yields cell types, but also, importantly, tells us how
they are wired to each other.
Implications for visual function
We clustered cell types with similar connectivity patterns (Fig. 2c),
and proposed tentative interpretations of the clusters in terms of
visual functions. These interpretations are speculations, but should
be useful for generating hypotheses that suggest interesting experiments.
Our hypothetical subsystems are devoted to motion, object
and colour vision (Figs. 5–7), and are fed by ON, OFF and luminance
channels (Fig. 4).
The motion subsystem (clusters 13–16) contains not only the T4
and T5 families but also many interneuron types. Most interneuron
types belong to the LPi family, which has been proposed to mediate
opponent interactions between cells that are activated by different
directions of motion8. Such opponency was demonstrated between
LPi09 and LPi11, also known as LPi3-4 and LPi4-357. It is likely that LPi
types can also mediate spatial normalization, as described in a companion
paper37.
Of the 51 types in the hypothetical object subsystem (clusters
9 and 12), T2 and T3 have been characterized by physiologists
as object detectors47. Above we hypothesized that a number of other
types (T2a, Tm21, Tm25, Tm27, TmY3 and Y3) are object detectors, and
these candidates can be tested by future experiments.
The hypothetical colour subsystem (clusters 1,3 and 4) contains 91
types. One can only speculate about the reason for this numeric preponderance.
Some insects are known to have sophisticated colour vision
capabilities such as colour constancy58. The computations required for
colour constancy are quite complex, requiring the integration of image
information over long ranges59. This could potentially be implemented
by the large number of Sm and Li interneuron types in the hypothetical
colour subsystem, assuming that Drosophila turns out to exhibit colour
constancy. Alternatively, it is possible that cluster 1 and cluster 3 have
additional functions other than colour vision, and should be subdivided
more finely (Extended Data Fig. 10). Future experiments will be needed
to test these hypotheses.
A companion paper predicts that the six types in cluster 2 (Fig. 2c)
should exhibit orientation selectivity60, and hypothesizes that cluster
2 is a subsystem for form vision. Cluster 2 connects to cluster 1
(Extended Data Fig. 11), suggesting an interaction between form and
colour computations.
Although we have carved the optic lobe into distinct subsystems, we
are aware that it is simplistic to assign every cell type to just one functional
subsystem. This is the result of the ‘hard’ clustering algorithm
that we have used, which always assigns a cell type to a single cluster.
In reality, a cell type could have more than one function, or a cell type
might mediate interactions between more than one subsystem. The
wiring diagrams show many connections between cell types in different
subsystems (Figs. 3–7 and Supplementary Data 5). Assigning such
a cell type to a single subsystem is inherently ambiguous.
Implications for visual development
The detailed wiring diagram for an adult visual system precisely specifies
the end goal of visual system development. Single-cell transcriptomics
is providing detailed information about the molecules in fly
visual neurons61–63. Comparison of transcriptomic and connectomic
information is already uncovering molecules that are important for
the development of the fly visual system64, and this trend is bound
to increase in momentum. Such research could be aided by our
low-dimensional discriminators of cell types (Supplementary Data 4
and Extended Data Fig. 3).
Complete and unbiased
Early studies6,32 relied on Golgi staining to sample neurons from multiple
individuals, a technique that is best suited for identifying the
most numerous types. Most of our new types are not as numerous
(10 to 100 cells), which may be why they were missed. Furthermore,
Golgi studies6 may have mistaken morphological variants for types,
which could explain why many of their types cannot be identified in
our optic lobe.
Contemporary light-microscopy anatomy leverages genetic lines,
but still does not evade the limitations of incomplete and biased sampling.
The story of Tm5 serves as a case in point. A breakthrough in
colour vision started by genetically labelling neurons that express
the histamine receptor Ort7. Researchers reasoned that Ort would be
expressed by cells postsynaptic to the chromatic photoreceptors R7
and R8, which are histaminergic. Then, light-microscopy anatomy
was used to make fine distinctions between three Tm5 types labelled
in the transgenic line7. The present connectomic work has revealed
six Tm5 types, a finding that was only foreshadowed by previous work
on the same EM dataset42. The three new Tm5 types were presumably
missed by previous studies because they receive little or no direct
photoreceptor input (Fig. 7c), and do not express Ort. Nevertheless,
they are similar to the old Tm5 types in morphology (Fig. 7a) and connectivity
(Fig. 2c), and have been grouped in the hypothetical colour
subsystem (Fig. 7c).
The Tm5 example demonstrates that connectomics can find fresh
patches in well-trodden ground. More telling is that connectomics
can guide us to entirely new landscapes, such as the 43 Sm types in an
entirely new type family.
Distinguishing cell types using connectivity
Features based on connectivity (Fig. 2a) enabled us to discriminate
between cell types that stratify in very similar neuropil layers. Stratification
constrains connectivity, because neurons cannot connect with
each other unless they overlap in the same layers1. However, stratification
does not completely determine connectivity, because neurons
in the same layer may or may not connect with each other. Classical
neuroanatomy, whether based on Golgi or genetic staining, relied on
stratification because it could be seen with a light microscope. Now that
we have electron microscopy data, we can rely on connectivity for cell
typing, rather than settle for stratification as a proxy2.
That being said, the present study used only connectivity at the
final stage of cell typing, which was seeded by the morphological
types identified during the first and second stages (Methods). It was
possible to demonstrate self consistency of the final cell types using
connectivity-based features only. We expect that it should be possible
to eliminate all dependence on morphological typing, and base the
approach on connectivity from start to finish. This challenge is left
for future work.
Spatial organization of connectivity
According to our wiring diagrams (Figs. 3–7 and Extended Data
Figs. 4–6), whether two neurons are connected depends on their cell
types. Connectivity also depends on the locations of the neurons in the
retinotopic maps of the optic lobe. As a trivial example, it is impossible
for cells with small arbours to be connected if they are at distant locations.
Less trivial dependences of connectivity on location also exist.
We expect them to be important for understanding vision, although
they turned out to be unnecessary for classifying cell types. To facilitate
spatial analyses of connectivity, the FlyWire Codex maps a number of
cell types to locations in the hexagonal lattice of columns and ommatidia.
In such analyses, it may be helpful to regard cell types and spatial
locations as discrete and continuous latent variables65. A companion
paper demonstrates how to predict visual function by characterizing
how connectivity depends on both cell type and spatial location. The
cell types of cluster 2 are predicted to exhibit orientation selectivity
and related phenomena reminiscent of the primary visual cortex60.
Artificial intelligence
This paper began by recounting the story66 of how wiring diagrams for
visual cortex drawn in the 1960s inspired convolutional nets, which
eventually sparked the deep learning revolution in artificial intelligence.
Convolutional nets have now been applied to reconstruct
the fly brain from electron microscopy images24, making the current
study possible. Coming full circle, the fly optic lobe turns out to be
as literal an implementation of a convolutional net as one could ever
expect from a biological system. The columns of the optic lobe form
a hexagonal lattice, rather than the square lattice used in computer
vision, but it is a highly regular lattice nonetheless, and the activities
of the neurons in each cell type are analogous to a feature map in a
convolutional net67. Although the connectional architecture of the
optic lobe conforms closely to the definition of a convolutional net,
the connections do not appear to be learned in the sense of artificial
intelligence. No changes in VPN structure68 and function69, and only
subtle changes in visual behaviour70 have been detected after rearing
flies in darkness, suggesting that visual experience may have little
role in Drosophila visual development. However, mechanisms based
on spontaneous activity in the pupal brain (before visual experience)
might have a role71.
Implications for mammalian cell types
In the central brain of Drosophila, cell types usually consist of just a
pair of mirror symmetric neurons9,25 (Extended Data Fig. 1e), as is also
the case for C. elegans72. By contrast, most optic lobe cell types are
represented by many neurons (Fig. 1d and Extended Data Fig. 1d), a
situation that is more reminiscent of mammalian brains3,73. Could our
connectomic approach generalize to mammalian brain structures such
as retina and cortex, which are laminated like the optic lobe?
Single-cell transcriptomics, often hailed as the solution to classifying
cortical cell types74, has also been applied to the Drosophila optic
lobe. One study reported 172 transcriptomic cell types, a figure that
includes VPNs as well as intrinsic neurons62. Our connectomic study
has revealed the existence of a much larger set of types (700+ including
boundary types). Encouragingly, many connectomic types can be
conclusively matched with transcriptomic types62. Failures to match
are interesting because they illustrate potential pitfalls of the transcriptomic
approach. For example, all eight T4/T5 types look like a
single transcriptomic type in adult flies62, and are only transcriptionally
distinct at earlier stages of development. This could be analogous to
the fact that adult cortical neurons of the same transcriptomic type can
have highly variable morphological properties75,76. It will be important
to scale up the connectomic approach, and make it as definitive for the
cortex as it is now for the fly visual system. A first attempt has already
been made in visual cortex19.
