The second part of the twentieth century was charac
terized by the development of new preparations trying 
to con fi rm the Hebb principle (see Chap.   26    ). In 1970, 
E. Kandel elaborated the gill-withdrawal re fl ex (GWR) 
paradigm from his work with  Aplysia : a water current 
on the gills produced their retraction. He elaborated 
the circuit involved, from the tactile receptors in the 
skin to the monosynaptic and polysynaptic pathways 
that induced the contraction of the gills. Over a period 
of 30 years, Kandel and coworkers explained the cel
lular and molecular mechanisms of habituation and 
dishabituation. They demonstrated differential classi
cal conditioning of the GWR of  Aplysia  and proposed 
activity-dependent presynaptic facilitation and pre
synaptic interaction between high intracellular Ca 2+
 levels and 5-HT. Many reviews have been published 
on the preparation differentiating short- and long-term 
memory storage (see Chap.   26    ). Postsynaptic pro
cesses are also involved in memory mechanisms in 
invertebrates. Neurotransmitters, second messenger 
systems, protein kinases, ion channels, and transcrip
tion factors like CREB have been con fi rmed to func
tion in both vertebrate and invertebrate learning and 
memory storage. 
The second preparation was on the mammalian 
hippocampus, a very stereotyped structure composed 
of an S curve, the dentate gyrus, the subiculum, and 
the enthorinal cortex and the three parts, CA3, CA2, 
and CA1. This structure was known from EEG record
ings for its characteristic 4–12 Hz oscillation, the 
theta rhythm associated with movement through 
space. The phenomenon of long-term potentiation 
(LTP) was initially observed in 1966 in the hippocam
pus of the rabbit by Terje Lomo, then working in the 
laboratory of Andersen. In 1973, he described the 
phenomenon in a seminal paper  [  41  ] . High frequency 
stimulation increased the excitatory response in the 
postsynaptic cell for 30 min to 10 h (Fig.  1.6 ). LTP 
was con fi rmed in hippocampus slices in 1975 by 
Schwartzkroin and Wester. At the beginning of the 
1980s, the role of NMDA receptors and calcium in fl ux 
at the postsynaptic cell became evident. Over the last 
years, evidence has accumulated to support the notion 
that dendritic spines are not passive structures but are 
involved in memory storage. Also, the hippocampus
appeared to possess “ place cells ” that  fi re when the 
animal is in a speci fi c place of a given environment. 
Following this discovery, O’Keefe and Nadel in 1978 
 [  42  ]  proposed that the primary function of the rat hip
pocampus is to form a “ cognitive map” of the envi
ronment (see Chap.   28    ).  
Invertebrates also perform complex neuronal activi
ties. Learning in honeybees can be compared to learn
ing in vertebrates in many respects, and the honeybee 
can be used as a model system to gain an understand
ing of the intermediate levels of complexity of cogni
tive functions and their neural substrates. The 
“ minibrain ” of the honeybee, with its 960,000 neurons, 
is now extensively explored; as Menzel said in a recent 
article “ Small brain ,  bright mind !”. 
Analysis of the brain’s cortical activities linked 
with a learning behavior was studied systematically 
in monkeys where different cortical units of different 
areas, sensory or motor, have been recorded in rela
tion with a given behavior (see Sect.  1.5 ). In the late 
1980s, it became possible to record several units 
simultaneously; with this one could analyze the tem poral structure of activity patterns. It appeared that 
ongoing activity has predictive power and that self
generated  fl uctuations can sometimes synchronize in 
attention or during high-level activities  [  43  ] . The 
mirror neurons  discovered by the group of Rizzolatti 
in 1996 have spectacular properties. These cells are 
both activated when the subject performs a motor 
action or when the subject observes someone in front 
performing the same action. Described  fi rst in the 
monkey, mirror neurons were con fi rmed in human. 
They have been considered as the substrate of several 
behaviors linked with action, intention, emotion, and 
empathy. Their dysfunction leads to impairment in 
social interactions as seen, for instance, in autism dis
orders; see  [  44  ] . 
Two types of recordings were used:  fi rst the EEG and 
then cortical imaging. EEG was a very global activity; 
still several events seemed linked with cognition. In 
1964, Walter et al. described the  contingent negative 
variation  ( CNV ) as a response linked to attention and 
vigilance. Sutton et al. in 1965  [  45  ]  described the 
“ P300  ( P3 )” wave, an event-related potential (ERP). 
Both were different, the CNV re fl ecting early arousal 
and attentional processes, P300 related to a decisional 
behavior involved in stimulus evaluation or categoriza
tion. Analyzed with other waves this showed that the 
brain produced some electrical signals linked with 
cognitive activities. 
B. Libet (1916–2007) in the 1980s suggested that a 
readiness potential is formed in the cortex 500 ms 
before a voluntary movement  [  46  ] . Thus decisions 
made by a subject are  fi rst being made at a subconscious 
level and become conscious only afterwards. With new 
brain scanning technology, Soon et al. (2008  [  47  ] ) were 
even able to demonstrate that the delay could reach 10 s 
before a subject is conscious of his decision. 
N. Geschwind (1826–1984) worked on aphasia and 
epilepsy, as well as dyslexias and on the neuroanatomy 
of cerebral lateral asymmetries. He coined the term 
behavioral neurology  in the 1970s to describe the 
ensemble of elements composing higher cortical func
tions. Ungerleider and Mishkin (1982) proposed sepa
rate pathways for characterizing object shape and 
location in extrastriate visual cortex. Around the 1990s, 
brain imaging became extensively used to con fi rm the 
data previously collected in neuropsychology with 
clinical observations and post-mortem analysis 
(autopsy). The different primary areas, sensory and 
motor, were characterized much more precisely. When 
more complex tasks were analyzed, associative areas 
were added. 
Computational neuroscience is the theoretical analysis 
and modeling of biological neural systems (see Chap.   30    ). 
Its goal is to propose models of biological neural net
works in order to relate them to cognitive processes and 
behavior. They range from simple behavior with indi
vidual neurons, through models with learning and mem
ory and short-term/long-term plasticity. Some of the 
models use architectures of Bayesian neural networks to 
include predictive capabilities and to use probabilities in 
order to characterize and process information. 
Animal models had been employed from the early 
days of science. Perhaps the  fi rst was the frog by the 
Dutch biologist Jan Swammerdam (1637–1680) who 
analyzed the nerve-muscle preparation and demon
strated that the nervous conduction was not due to the 
“ animal ’ s spirits ” as it was said by Galen (129–201 
AD) and René Descartes (1596–1650), an old notion 
that considered the presence of a  fl uid necessary for 
muscle contractions. Swammerdam proved that when 
a muscle contracted, its volume did not change (see 
Chap.   22    ). Frogs were used routinely thereafter. Their 
great advantage was that the preparation stays alive for 
several hours at room temperature, as the animals are 
poikilotherms. 
During the nineteenth century, invertebrates were con
sidered for some of their very particularly large neural 
structures, such as the giant  fi ber system of the earth
worm, of the leech, or of the crab. The animal receiving 
most attention at the time was the cray fi sh that the 
British biologist T.H. Huxley (1825–1895) described in 
great detail in his book “The cray fi sh” (1879). In the 
preface he explained the goal of such models defending 
comparative anatomy with great emphasis: “I have 
desired, in fact, to show how the careful study of one of 
the commonest and most insigni fi cant of animals, leads 
us, step by step, from every-day knowledge to the wid
est generalizations and the most dif fi cult problems of 
zoology; and, indeed, of biological  science in general.” 
During the twentieth century, invertebrates were 
used to  fi nd particular neuronal structures that could 
be analyzed easily in a particular animal. The best 
example is the famous squid axon that gave Hodgkin, 
Huxley, and Katz the possibility to understand nervous 
conduction (1952  [  48  ] ). The discovery of the giant 
axon has been described by J.S. Young. He had 
identi fi ed the long  fi ber at the Naples’ marine research 
station and had initially thought that it was a blood 
vessel. In 1935, Young came to Woods Hole where 
squids were kept in very good shape in circular aquari
ums. He observed that an electrical stimulation of that 
giant  fi ber did not induce a muscle twitch. Young sug
gested that the best stimulus could be a chemical stim
ulus like Na +  citrate. Then, he connected a  fi ber to an 
ampli fi er and a speaker and put some citrate on the 
end of it. “Out came – buzzzzzzzz – one of the best 
sounds I have ever heard” said Young several years 
later. It was the beginning of intense work on this 
nerve  fi ber on both sides of the Atlantic with Cole and 
Curtiss in Woods Hole, and the British in Plymouth 
and Cambridge. 
Cray fi sh and the larger crustaceans  Homarus  or  Pali
nurus  have been excellent models for  characterizing 
neuromuscular innervation. The Dutch Cornelius 
Adrianus Gerrit Wiersma (1905–1979) at the University 
of California (UCLA) analyzed systematically the 
peripheral nerve-muscle system of crustaceans. 
Recording after stimulation of the different leg motor 
nerves, excitatory junction potentials with an Einthoven 
string galvanometer, he demonstrated the existence of 
separate excitatory and inhibitory motoneurons (MNs). 
The opener distal muscle was exceptional with only 
two motoneurons, one excitatory and one inhibitory. 
Insects, in particular crickets and cockroaches, pre
sented the same advantages and were often used. In 
re fl ex activities it has been possible to characterize the 
proprioceptive control of each motoneuron of a given 
muscle (see Fig.  1.7 ).
They were known to have large nervous cells. This was 
demonstrated by Angélique Arvanitaki (1901–1983) in 
Lyon, France, when working on the sea slug  Aplysia . 
At the marine station of Tamaris (near Toulon) she dis
covered its very complex nervous system. She pre
sented a general description of the different ganglia 
focusing on the visceral ganglion with the largest cells 
(up to 500  m m in diameter). Several electrical record
ings were made. She observed spontaneous rhythmic 
activity in some cells (Arvanitaki and Cardot 1941 
 [  49  ] ). Her best intracellular recordings were carried out 
in 1955. L. Tauc at the Marey Institute in Paris  analyzed 
the different intracellular potentials with two micro
electrodes. Arvanitaki travelled to the U.S. in 1958 and 
reported there on her preparation in several leading 
laboratories. As a result, the procedure was adopted by 
the scienti fi c community, in particular by Eric Kandel. 
Aplysia  – as most invertebrate preparations – was 
studied because neural networks consist of only a 
small number of neurons. This has several advantages. 
It is possible to locate cell bodies inside ganglia and 
to produce an initial form of “neurogeography” ( [  50  ]  
see Fig.  1.4 ) showing a small number of interneurons 
able to control selected hierarchical behaviors. Cells 
were identi fi ed as contributing to restricted circuits 
supporting a stereotyped behavior through re fl ex 
modulation. It was “the golden age” for these 
preparations! 
Miller and Selverston, studying the stomatogastric 
ganglion of Crustacea – perhaps the key preparation 
for neural networks (see Chap.   23    ) –  fi lled identi fi ed 
neurons with procyon yellow and killed them with 
blue light (1979  [  51  ] ). This allowed to study the net
work with and without a single neuron. It appeared 
around 1960, that a great number of isolated inverte
brate ganglia presented a central rhythmical activity 
that was called a  central pattern generator  ( CPG ), 
a term  fi rst used in 1965 by Wilson and Wyman. 
The pharmacological differences between inver
tebrates and vertebrates have also been used. 
Expression of the insect allatostatin receptor in a 
population of mouse neurons allows to activate them 
selectively by applying allatostatin, since there is no 
mammalian receptor that responds to this peptide 
(Fig.  1.8 ). The onset and reversal inactivation can be 
accomplished rapidly. For example, in the mouse 
spinal cord it was possible to characterize the role of 
V1 interneurons. The new  fi eld of “optogenetics” 
now develops several probes that when activated by 
light open channels or initiate second messenger 
cascades, increasing the toolbox for manipulative 
experiments. 
In the eighteenth century, it was not possible to keep 
mammals alive for more than 10 min after surgical 
opening. Once they could be kept alive for several 
hours they were considered for neurobiological stud
ies. Cats were employed by Sherrington for spinal cord 
experiments – his most famous experiment induced 
decerebrate rigidity after severance at the level of the 
brain stem: the cat was in complete extension due to 
the suppression of inhibition coming from the cortex. 
F. Bremer (1892–1982) proposed in 1935 the “isolated 
encephalon ( encéphale isolé )” and the “isolated brain 
stem ( cerveau isolé )” that were considered as key 
elements in the understanding of sleep. In the former
case, the cat was awake and sleepy as normal, in the 
latter it slept all the time (Fig.  1.9 ).  
The dif fi culty was to stimulate central nuclei or 
particular pathways. This was only possible with the 
apparatus proposed by Horsley-Clarke in the early 
twentieth century. Around 1890, the famous neurosur
geon Victor Horsley (1857–1916), who was professor 
in London at Brown Institute, met Robert-Henry 
Clarke (1853–1931) from Queens College of 
Cambridge and they became close friends. Around 
1895, Clarke proposed to build an apparatus that  fi xed 
the head of the cat at the mouth, ears, and at the base of 
the orbits. The brain was mapped in a 3D system (three 
cartesian coordinates were taken, laterolateral ( x ), 
dorso ventral ( y ), and rostrocaudal ( z )). In 1906, James 
Swift built the prototype in London. It was published 
in  Brain  in 1908 and it was quite useful for limited 
electrolytic lesions. The original apparatus is now in 
the Museum of the University College Hospital, 
London. But the two friends had very different charac
ters, Clarke was a great sportsman, enjoying life but 
was very shy. Horsley was “very Victorian” and extro
vert. Clarke did not accept the glory around his col
league and became paranoiac. The apparatus went to 
California and seemed abandoned. It was only used 
again 30 years later around 1940 with the electrical 
stimulations of the reticular formation. It was then 
used extensively in all physiological laboratories for 
more than 40 years.
The “cat model”-period came to an end in the 1980s; 
cats were progressively abandoned for ethical reasons 
but also for their high cost and for the duration of the 
preparation. The rat appeared as a suitable alternative, 
it was much easier to explore, the anatomy and 
the pharmacology were well described. The success of 
the invertebrates had introduced some “simple 
vertebrates” like the lamprey,  Xenopus  eggs, or the 
tortoise. Lower vertebrate preparations were a good 
solution with even their simplicity, a similar anatomy 
and functional  properties as they exist in all verte
brates. For example, S. Grillner analyzed in great detail 
the anguilliform mode of locomotion of the lamprey, 
and A. Roberts and K. Sillar the swimming of the 
developing  Xenopus  tadpole. 
Two other very popular preparations that can be 
used today for  in vitro  or  in vivo  chronological record
ings are the chick and the neonatal rat. The great inter
est is that both have an embryonic stage of 3 weeks and 
a postnatal life of similar duration, 3 weeks. Their 
development is quite different though: the precocial 
chick is able to walk at birth, while the altricial neo
natal rat needs to remain in the nest, its development 
is gradual. A comparison of the two species is 
very  useful for understanding maturation processses. 
Pioneering work on chicks was performed by Ham
burger and Balaban (1963  [  52  ] ) and on rats by Otsuka 
and Konishi (1974  [  53  ] ). Recently, mice have become 
the most important laboratory animals because 
• 
techniques have been developed to generate transgenic 
strains. 
Two other methods have been used in 
neuroscience:
 Brain slices: This technique was developed in the 
• 
late 1960s to study the hippocampus. Thick sec
tions of living brain tissue are maintained  in vitro  in 
a solution of arti fi cial cerebrospinal  fl uid that dif
fuses into all pieces of tissue. Used extensively and 
for almost all regions of mammalian central ner
vous system, slices preserve many circuits that can 
be  fi nely analyzed.  
Cell cultures: Slices of CNS tissues that are pre
pared from young rodents are maintained in cul
ture with a stable medium for many weeks. Nerve 
cells continue to differentiate and to develop a tis
sue organization that closely resembles that 
observed in situ. Long-term survival is achieved 
by culturing slices at the air/liquid interface, either 
by continuously rotating the preparation (roller
tube cultures, Gahwiler, 1981  [  54  ] ) or by culturing 
them on semiporous membranes (Stoppini et al. 
1991  [  55  ] ). 
Several models are used depending on the behavioral 
sequences that can be recorded and the facility to 
obtain and reproduce them. Let us consider birds and 
their singing behaviors, for instance. They vary among 
species, and most singing takes place during the breed
ing season. These songs are learned and not inherited. 
The avian vocal organ is called the syrinx; it is a bony 
structure at the bottom of the trachea. The most com
mon species studied are the zebra  fi nch ( Taeniopygia 
guttata ), the chaf fi nch ( Fringilla coelebs ), the 
European starling, and the robin. Studies on singing 
nervous centers con fi rmed the complexity of its pro
duction and some correspondences with human 
speaking. 
In mammals, most of the behavioral analysis is 
done on rats or mice. Monkeys are also used: the squir
rel monkey (S aïmiri sciureus ) is interesting for vision, 
vocalization, and olfactory communication, the baboon 
(genus  Papio ) for manual coordination. In  Papio papio
 light-induced epilepsy was discovered by R. Naquet. 
With photonic stimulation at 20–25 Hz spontaneous 
bifrontal discharges (mainly spike and wave) occur. 
This epilepsy has been found also in humans. 
The most useful monkeys for electrophysiology 
have been  Macacus  and  Rhesus mulatta  that survive 
well in captivity. In 1965, E.V. Evarts (1926–1985) 
was able to record single cortical neurons from the 
motor area of monkeys controlling the  fl exion or the 
extension of their wrist. He found that some units are 
activated about 100 ms before the movements. This 
was a start of several studies on these animals to ana
lyze cortical organization. 
With this new discipline, new models were created 
with two opposite considerations. One was to  fi nd the 
simplest system for particular questions, the second 
was to be near to humans to examine different 
pathologies. 
Sydney Brenner as a molecular biologist created the 
f
 i rst computer matrix analysis of nucleic acids. He 
was then interested to  fi nd the most simple animal to 
analyze biological activities. He explained his goal in 
a letter to Max Perutz: (5 June 1963): “The experi
mental approach I would like to follow is to attempt to 
de fi ne the unitary steps of development using the 
techniques of genetic analysis… Our success with 
bacteria has suggested to me that we could use the 
same approach to study the speci fi cation and control 
of more complex processes in cells of higher organ
isms. As a  fi rst stage, I would like to initiate studies 
into the control of cell division in higher cells, in par
ticular to try to  fi nd out what determines meiosis and 
mitosis. In this work there is a great need to “microbi
ologize” the material so that one can handle the cells 
as one handles bacteria and viruses. Hence, like in the 
case of replication and transcription, one wants a 
model system.” He then decided to work on a small 
nematode worm,  Caenorhabditis briggsae  (in fact, it 
was  C .  elegans  that was selected). Brenner has 
demonstrated very clearly that a scienti fi c project is 
exclusively linked with the model used. At his Nobel 
lecture on December 2002, he proposed the following 
title to congratulate his modest nematode: “ Nature ’ s 
Gift to Science ”. 
Investigations with  Drosophila melanogaster  started 
even earlier – Thomas Hunt Morgan (1866–1945) 
had employed it in his genetic studies. He was a 
highly competent zoologist who had  fi rst worked at 
Naples marine station in 1894. By 1904, when Morgan 
took a professorship in experimental zoology at 
Columbia University, he was becoming increasingly 
focused on the mechanisms of heredity and evolu
tion. In 1900 Hugo De Vries (1848–1935), a Dutch 
botanist,  proposed that new species are created by 
mutation. Following the American entomologist C.W. 
Woodworth (1865–1940) and the American geneti
cist W.E. Castle (1867–1962), Morgan in 1908 started 
working on the fruit  fly. In 1909, a 
series of heritable mutants appeared, some of which 
displaying Mendelian inheritance patterns. In 1910, 
Morgan found a white-eyed mutant male among 
the red-eyed wild types. In 1915, he published with 
his team the seminal book  The Mechanism of 
Mendelian Heredity  and he was later awarded the 
Nobel Prize (1933) for his genetic studies of this 
small  fly. 
The zebrafish  Danio rerio , a tropical freshwater 
fish, is an ideal model organism for studies of verte
brate development and gene function for various rea
sons: the genetic code is fully sequenced, the  fi sh is 
easily observable and testable for developmental 
behavior, the mutants are well-characterized, the 
embryonic development is rapid, it takes only 3 days 
from egg to larva. Embryos that develop outside the 
mother are large and transparent. Drugs may be admin
istered directly to the tank. 
Today, the most intensively used animals for genetic 
studies are mice. Work on this model is so dominant 
that we have sometimes the impression to only charac
terize the neuroscience of mice!
The modern theory of biological evolution, as estab
lished by Charles Darwin and Alfred Russel Wallace 
in the middle of the nineteenth century, is based on 
three interrelated facts: (i)  phylogeny  – the common 
history of organisms on earth stretching back over 3.5 
billion years, (ii)  evolution  in a narrow sense – 
modi fi cations of organisms during phylogeny and 
underlying mechanisms, and (iii)  speciation  – the 
process by which new species arise during phylogeny. 
Regarding the phylogeny, it is now commonly accepted 
that all organisms on Earth are derived from a com
mon ancestor or an ancestral gene pool, while contro
versies have remained since the time of Darwin and 
Wallace about the major mechanisms underlying the 
observed modi fi cations during phylogeny (cf   .  [  1  ] ). 
The prevalent view of  neodarwinism  (or better 
“new” or “modern evolutionary synthesis”) is charac
terized by the assumption that evolutionary changes 
are caused by a combination of two major processes, 
(i) heritable variation of individual genomes within a 
population by mutation and recombination, and (ii) 
natural selection, i.e., selective environmental or 
genomic forces leading to better adaptation of those 
bearing the mutation and as a consequence to their 
greater differential reproductive success. The  modern 
synthesis  holds that evolutionary changes are gradual 
in the sense that larger, macro-evolutionary, changes 
are the sum of smaller, micro-evolutionary, changes. 
Other experts argue that such a gradualistic view of 
evolution (including “sexual selection” and “genetic 
drift”) is incomplete; they point to a number of other 
and perhaps equally important mechanisms such as 
(i) neutral gene evolution without natural selection, 
(ii) mass extinctions wiping out up to 90 % of existing 
species (such as the Cambrian, Devonian, Permian, and 
Cretaceous-Tertiary mass extinctions) and (iii) genetic 
and epigenetic-developmental (“ evo - devo ”) self-canal
ization of evolutionary processes  [  2  ] . It remains uncer
tain as to which of these possible processes principally 
drive the evolution of nervous systems and brains. 
In most cases, the reconstruction of the evolution of 
nervous systems and brains cannot be based on fossil
ized material, since their soft tissues decompose, but 
has to make use of the distribution of neural traits in 
extant species. This is usually done by means of the 
phylogenetic or cladistic method as originally devel
oped by the German entomologist Willi Hennig  [  3  ] . 
This method is based on whether a given character (or 
trait) represents an ancestral,  plesiomorphic , or a 
derived,  apomorphic  state. The result of such an analy
sis is a “tree” called  cladogram  re fl ecting shared 
derived characters called  synapomorphies  or  homolo
gies . Characters used for the construction of a  clado
gram  can be of any nature, but mostly are anatomical 
or biochemical. The standard criterion between com
peting cladograms is the  principle of parsimony  stat
ing that the most likely evolutionary hypothesis is that 
minimizing the number of independent ( convergent  or 
homoplastic ) steps of modi fi cation of the character 
under consideration. If different species of animals 
coincide in the formation of a given character in detail 
(e.g., the structure of the inner ear or the genetic 
sequence of a membrane channel), then it appears 
more likely that these species are related and the coin
cidence of characters is due to common ancestry, i.e., 
that they are  homologous . However, there is increasing 
evidence that convergent-homoplastic evolution is 
much more common than previously believed, which 
weakens the principle of parsimony. 
In the reconstruction of the evolution of nervous 
systems and brains, however, the primary goal is 
not the construction of new cladograms, but an answer 
to the question whether within a group (taxon) of ani
mals the presence or absence of a given character, e.g., 
the six-layered isocortex as found in all mammals, rep
resents an ancestral (plesiomorphic) or derived (apo
morphic) state. This requires the availability of 
well-established cladograms, which are based on non
neural characters in order to avoid circular conclu
sions. However, such well-established cladograms do 
not always exist, and therefore one often has to operate 
with competitive cladograms. 
 Figure  2.1  illustrates the present knowledge about 
the major groups of organisms – the “tree of life”. 
According to most recent evidence, the earth was 
formed about 4.5 billion years ago (bya). First organ
isms appeared about 3.5 bya as prokaryotic bacteria 
and archaea (these are organisms without a cell 
nucleus). Unicellular eukaryotes (which bear a cell 
nucleus) originated 2.7–1.6 bya, simple multicellular 
animals (sponges) about 1 bya, and coelenterates about 
700 million years ago (mya). First deuterostomes and 
first arthropods appeared 570 mya, cephalopods as 
well as  fi rst  fi shlike animals and proto-amphibians 
about 500 mya, insects about 400 mya, amphibians 
360 mya, reptiles 300 mya, mammals 200 mya, and 
birds 150 mya. First human-like animals (australopith
ecines) appeared 4 mya, and modern humans ( Homo 
sapiens sapiens ) 200,000–150,000 years ago. 
Nervous systems and brains have a dual function, i.e., 
the maintenance of inner “vital” functions of the organ
ism and the control of behavior of that organism within 
a given environment  [  4  ] . Unicellular organisms exert 
the same functions and exhibit remarkably complex 
behaviors, although they do not possess, by de fi nition, 
a nervous system. 
Bacteria  sense nutritive substances (e.g., sugar) or 
toxins (e.g., heavy metal) in their environments through 
a large number of chemoreceptors as well as obstacles 
through mechanoreceptors  [  5  ] . This diverse informa
tion is integrated and, through a chain of complex 
chemical reactions, drives their  fl agella for movement. 
Escherichia coli  has six  fl agella, each possessing a pro
ton-driven motor, that are combined to one single 
super fl agellum for forward propulsion (“run”) as soon 
as receptors detect an increase in nutritive or a decrease 
in toxic substances. In the opposite case, the 
super fl agellum disintegrates, and the single  fl agella 
move independently. As a consequence,  E .  coli  starts 
“tumbling” and randomly changes its direction of 
movement until the receptors sense a new gradient, and 
a new “run” begins. The bacterium has a mini-memory, 
by which it can compare the incoming information with 
previous information, and this “knowledge” determines 
the behavior. Thus, even in these most primitive organ
isms we  fi nd the three basic components for adaptive 
control of behavior, i.e., a sensorium, a motorium and in 
between information storage and processing. Other 
bacteria or archaea like  Halobacterium  possess light
sensitive spots that make them swim toward sunlight. 
Unicellular eukaryotes such as  Paramecium  or 
Euglena , despite their unicellular organization, exhibit 
a much more complex control of behavior than bacte
ria or archaea  [  6  ] . They possess either  fl agella com
posed of microtubules and attached to their front, 
which bend to perform a breakstroke, or cilia that 
cover the entire body and are able to exert coordinated 
movements, or pseudopodia. They gather information 
about their environment through voltage-gated, hyper
polarizing potassium and depolarizing calcium ion 
channels, while voltage-gated sodium channels are 
absent and found only from planarians, possibly cni
darians onwards. The calcium and potassium channels 
are used, among others, for the release of forward and 
backward movement. Many protozoans respond to 
chemical, tactile, temperature and visual stimuli. 
Euglena  and  Paramecium  and other unicellular 
eukaryotes possess light-sensitive organelles for pho
totaxis. It is debated whether they already possess an 
intracellular system for central movement 
coordination. 
 Figure  2.2  illustrates the phylogeny of the Metazoa, 
i.e., multicellular organisms, which are divided into 
Nonbilateria and Bilateria. Porifera (sponges, 8,000 
species, all aquatic) are the simplest metazoans. They 
possess “independent effectors” or  myocytes , which 
have sensori-motor functions and directly respond to 
stimuli, but are not electrically excitable  [  7  ] . Sponges 
can regulate the water stream through openings (ostia) 
inside their body by modifying the diameters of these 
ostia. The inner surface of the ostia is covered with 
choanocytes carrying one  fl agellum each, and their 
movement can drive the water through the ostium in a 
coordinated fashion. The presence of true nerve cells is 
debated, because there is no convincing evidence for 
electrical signal conduction.
Eumetazoans comprise all metazoans except the 
Porifera. The evolutionary origin of the  fi rst nerve 
cells among eumetazoans is still a matter of debate 
(cf.  [  7, 8  ] ). One assumption is that sensory and nerve 
cells originated from neuromuscular cells, while 
other authors postulate an independent origin of sen
sory, nerve, and muscle cells from epithelial cells. 
The “paraneuron” concept proposes the evolution of 
nerve cells from secretory cells. Even unicellular 
eukaryotes, plants, and non-neuronal cells display 
many features of nerve cells such as membrane poten
tial, transmitters and other neuroactive substances, 
membrane receptors, ion channels, many chemical 
processes relevant for “neuronal information process
ing”, and even action potentials – all of which being 
more than 1 billion years old and thus older than 
nerve cells and nervous systems. One remarkable 
exception is the voltage-gated sodium channel, which
is found  fi rst in planarians, perhaps already in 
cnidarians. 
Coelenterates are nonbilaterian eumetazoans. Today 
they are considered two independent phyla, Cnidaria 
and Ctenophora (together about 11,000 species) and 
exhibit both the simplest types of nervous system 
(nerve nets) as well as relatively complex forms, i.e., 
radially symmetric nervous systems (Fig.  2.3 ). A cen
tral nervous system is absent  [  7  ] . The phylum Cnidaria 
comprises the sessile Anthozoa (sea anemones, cor
als), Scyphozoa (jelly fi sh), Cubozoa (box jellies), and 
Hydrozoa (hydras). Epidermal nerve nets are found in 
sessile hydrozoans like the freshwater polyp  Hydra . 
There is a concentration (nerve rings) around the 
mouth and the peduncle of this animal. Complex sense 
organs are absent, but  Hydra  responds to mechanical, 
chemical, visual, and temperature stimuli. The 
free-swimming medusa forms of scyphozoans, in con
trast, possess complex circular nervous systems inside 
the rim of the umbrella – the inner  subumbrellar  nerve 
ring contains large bipolar “swim motor neurons” for 
synchronous umbrella contraction, and the outer 
exumbrellar  nerve ring consists of small multipolar 
sensory cells which are in contact with light-sensitive 
cells in mouth and tentacles. Both nerve rings are 
interconnected. Sensory organs are the ocelli (pigment 
spots, cup ocelli, or even “eyes” with biconvex lenses), 
statocystes (balance organs), and “rhopalia”, i.e., com
plex clublike balance organs, often combined with 
photo- and chemoreceptors, which initiate the rhyth
mic contraction of the medusas. The nervous system of 
cnidarians is characterized by the dominance of elec
tric synapses, although chemical synapses are likewise 
present. Chemical transmission is mostly exerted by a 
number of neuropeptides (e.g., FMRFamides and 
RFamides; cf.  [  10  ] ), although there is evidence of 
cholingergic, serotonergic, dopaminergic, and gluta
matergic transmissions in different cnidarians species.
Animals with bilateral symmetry (“Bilateria”) com
prise the three major groups of phyla, the Acoelomorpha, 
Protostomia, and Deuterostomia, the latter two together 
forming the “Coelomata”, i.e., organisms with a sec
ondary body cavity (see Fig.  2.2 ). However, the phy
logeny of the Bilateria has not yet been  fi rmly 
consolidated. 
Acoelomorpha include very small bilateral animals 
resembling  fl atworms and were previously assigned to 
the phylum Platyhelminthes (see below). They possess 
a diffuse subepidermal nerve net resembling that of 
Hydra  and representing the simplest form of a bilateral 
nervous system. Since such diffuse subepidermal nerve 
nets are likewise found in other  fl atworm-like 
organisms, it is not certain whether this type has 
evolved independently, e.g., via secondary simpli fi cation 
of more complex types  [  11  ]  or represents the ancestral 
form of all bilaterial nervous systems  [  12  ] . 
According to molecular phylogeny (cf. Fig.  2.2 ), pro
tostome phyla are grouped into the Lophotrochozoa – 
animals carrying a lophophor (a complex feeding 
organ) or possessing a trochophora larva, and the 
Ecdysozoa, i.e., with ecdysis (see below). Many phyla 
of the lophotrochozoans include small and often ses
sile organisms such as the Bryozoa (also called 
Ectoprocta), the Brachiopoda, Echiura, Entoprocta, or 
Nemertini – all with simple to very simple (possibly 
simpli fi ed) nervous systems consisting of two or more 
nerve cords extending from a supraesophageal gan
glion through the elongated body, which are connected 
by a number of commissures. In the following, only 
the larger phyla are described. 
Platyhelminthes ( fl atworms; 25,000–30,000 species), 
comprise a number of species previously called 
“Turbellaria” (whereas other “turbellarians” are now 
included in the Acoela, which are not considered to 
belong to the Platyhelminthes), and the endoparasitic 
tapeworm groups Cestoda (tapeworms; 3,500 species) 
and Trematoda ( fl ukes; about 20,000 species). The 
phylogeny of platyhelminths remains unresolved, how
ever. “Turbellarian” platyhelminths may possess very
simple nervous systems resembling the subepidermal 
diffuse nerve net found in the Acoela. In other forms, 
there is a supraesophageal ganglion giving rise to dor
sal and ventral longitudinal cords connected by com
missural tracts. The longitudinal cords can either 
consist entirely of  fi bers or of  fi bers forming regularly 
arranged ganglia (Fig.  2.4 ). The most complex nervous 
systems are found in predatory  fl atworms (planarians) 
such as  Notoplana  and  Stylochoplana  with cerebral 
ganglia consisting of  fi ve different “brain masses”. 
Flatworms possess a variety of sense organs such as 
tactile or chemoreceptors on the head and all over the 
body, statocysts and inverse or everse pigment pit eyes 
containing several hundred photoreceptors (Fig.  2.5 ). 
Some of them are found as a pair of ocelli on the head, 
other terrestrial  fl atworms have more than 1,000 ocelli. 
Due to their endoparasitic life style, trematodes and 
cestodes have a simpli fi ed nervous system consisting 
of a simple “brain” and a varying number of longitudi
nal  fi ber tracts. 
Annelida (segmented worms; about 18,000 species) 
are another large lophotrochozoan group. They are 
divided into Polychaeta (with hairs, chetae, and leglike 
parapodia) and Clitellata, the latter comprising oli
gochaetes (earthworms) and hirudineans (leeches), 
both without hairs and parapodia. Annelids possess a 
paired “ladder-type” central nervous system (Fig.  2.6 ). 
In its simplest state this structure consists of a cerebral 
or supraesophageal nerve ring or ganglion giving rise 
to paired ventral cords with a pair of ganglia per body 
segment connected by transverse connectives (anasto
moses). In annelids, the cerebral ganglion has vari
ously undergone an increase in complexity; in predatory 
polychaetes it has developed into a three-partite brain 
resembling the proto-, deuto-, and tritocerebrum of the 
insect brain (see below). Here, but also in some oligochaetes, the  fi rst segments of the ventral nerve cord 
are often fused into a subesophageal ganglion. In the 
oligochaetes, we  fi nd a modest, and in hirudineans a 
massive simpli fi cation of this basic organization. 
Within the ventral nerve cord of most oligochaetes and 
some polychaetes there are giant  fi bers with very fast 
conduction velocity (three in oligochaetes) separated 
from the thinner  fi bers. Annelids possess a large vari
ety of tactile and chemosensory organs, feelers or 
antennae, palps, and one ciliated “nuchal organ” pos
sibly involved in light detection. Other light-sensitive 
organs range from very simple pigment spots and eye 
pits to compound eyes and lens eyes with accommoda
tion mechanism in some predatory polychaetes, and 
have evolved independently of similar eye types in 
other animal groups (Fig.  2.7 ).   
Molluska are the largest lophotrochozoan group 
(100,000 or more species). Their phylogenetic rela
tionships are still unresolved. Besides several smaller 
groups, there are three large taxa, i.e., Gastropoda 
(snails and slugs, about 70,000 species), Bivalvia 
(clams, oysters, mussels, scallops; 10,000–20,000 spe
cies), and Cephalopoda (cuttle fi sh, squid, and octo
pods; about 800 species). 
The molluskan nervous systems range from rela
tively simple (or simpli fi ed) forms resembling those 
found in acoelans to the most complex ones among 
invertebrates, in the cephalopods. The basic pattern is 
a  tetraneural  nervous system consisting of a cerebral 
ganglion, which gives rise to two dorsal pleurovisceral 
and two ventral pedal nerve cords. In the ancestral 
state, nerve cell bodies are not concentrated in ganglia, 
but are dispersed throughout the cords. The formation
of ganglia in mollusks is a derived state that occurred 
independently of the formation of ganglia in other 
forms such as annelids and arthropods.
The nervous system of snails and slugs consists of four 
nerve cords – hence the term  tetraneural  nervous sys
tem – with maximally six pairs of ganglia and mostly 
one unpaired visceral ganglion (Fig.  2.8a ). The nerve 
cords are mostly linked by commissures. The paired 
cerebral ganglia connected by a commissure are 
located around the esophagus and process information
to and from the eyes, to statocysts, head tentacles, 
skin, and muscles of the lip, head, and sometimes 
penis region. One pair of buccal ganglia with a com
missure is situated below the esophagus and innervates 
the pharynx, salivary glands, a nerve plexus of the 
esophagus and the stomach. One pair of pleural (i.e., 
lung membrane) ganglia without a commissure is con
nected by cords with the cerebral, buccal, and parietal
visceral ganglia. The pedal ganglia innervate feet 
muscles and skin. The cerebral, pleural, and pedal 
ganglia together form the “brain”. The supra- and sub
intestinal ganglia innervate the gills, the “osphradium” 
(an olfactory organ) and parts of the mantle and skin; 
one pair of parietal ganglion (not present in all gastro
pods) innervates the lateral walls of the body. Finally, 
the unpaired visceral ganglion supplies the caudal 
region of the gut, anus, and neighboring regions of the 
skin and body wall, sexual organs, kidney, liver, and 
heart. It completes the “visceral loop”, i.e., the chain 
of ganglia and cords from the pleural to the visceral 
ganglion. 
A fusion of ganglia, mostly of the “visceral loop”, 
is observed in many gastropods, e.g., in air-breathing 
landsnails. The most highly developed gastropod 
“brain” is found in  Helix pomatia  (the Roman or 
Burgundy snail). It consists of a protocerebrum with 
globuli (i.e., globe-like neuronal contact zones) and 
dense neuropils, a mesocerebrum, and a postcerebrum 
with pleural and pedal lobes. This organization is 
remarkably similar to that of other invertebrates 
with complex brains, but has presumably evolved 
independently. 
Gastropods have chemoreceptive and mechanore
ceptive sense organs distributed all over the body. 
Complex sense organs comprise statocysts, eyes rang
ing from widely open pit eyes ( Patella ), pinhole eyes 
( Trochus ) to lense eyes ( Helix ), and chemosensitive 
osphradia in the mantle near the gills. 
Some sea slugs have gained fame in modern neuro
biology, e.g., the Californian “sea hare”  Aplysia cali
fornica , which possesses some very large nerve cells 
that can be detected with the naked eye and are well
suited for studies of neuronal information processing 
and learning processes  [  15  ] .
Bivalves  have a secondarily simpli fi ed nervous system 
with only three pairs of ganglia with an emphasis on 
the visceral ganglion, which is often fused with the 
parietal ganglia. In most species, the rostralmost gan
glion is a fused cerebral, pleural, and buccal ganglion. 
Some bivalves, e.g., the scallop  Pecten , have eyes on 
the rim of the mantle, often with a complex anatomy 
(e.g., a distal and proximal retina).
Cephalopods have highly developed nervous systems 
characterized by fusion of ganglia and subsequent 
development into lobes forming a complex brain 
around the esophagus. There are lobes that correspond 
to the cerebral, buccal, labial, pleural, and visceral 
ganglia of other mollusks, while innovative structures 
are the central optic-visual, olfactory, and peduncular 
ganglia as well as peripheral branchial and stellar gan
glia (cf.  [  16, 17  ] ). 
The well-known  Nautilus  possesses a relatively 
simple brain without bulging supraesophageal lobes 
and with unfused subesophageal lobes, which  probably 
represents the ancestral state of cephalopods. Members 
of the subclass Coleoidea comprising cuttle fi sh, squids, 
and octopods have much more complex brains. The 
most complex nervous system and brain of all inverte
brates is that of the octopus (Fig.  2.8b, c ). Its nervous 
system contains about 550 million neurons, 350 of 
which are located inside the eight arms, 120–180 mil
lion neurons in the giant optic lobes, and 42 million 
neurons in the brain. The latter encircles the esophagus 
and is composed of 38 lobes. The supraesophageal part 
is divided into 16 lobes and contains the mass of neu
rons. It has a ventral portion involved in the control of 
feeding and locomotion, and a dorsal portion exerting
cognitive functions, mostly visual and tactile
chemosensory. The vertical lobe is considered the most 
complex part of the octopus brain. It is composed of 
f
 i ve lobules and contains about 26 million neurons. 
The vertical lobe is closely connected to the subverti
cal lobe containing about 800,000 neurons, and the 
interaction of both lobes, processed by a spectacularly 
regular network of millions of  fi bers arranged in a rect
angular fashion, is regarded as the neural basis of the
astonishing learning and memory capacity of  Octopus
 [  18  ] . Likewise complex are the giant optic lobes exhib
iting a laminar neuropil resembling the cortex of mam
mals. They process the visual information arriving 
from the large lens eyes. These eyes are capable of lens 
accommodation and pupil contraction achieved by 
muscles, and have a striking similarity to the vertebrate 
eye, although they are the product of convergent 
evolution.
The Ecdysozoa comprise all invertebrate animals that 
shed their exoskeleton – a process called “ecdysis”. 
According to present taxonomy they include eight 
phyla, the largest of them being the Nematoda and the 
Arthropoda. The smaller groups mostly have relatively 
simple or simpli fi ed brains and simple sense organs. 
Nematodes (roundworms; about 28,000 species) are 
the most numerous multicellular animals on Earth. 
Probably due to their predominantly parasitic lifestyle, 
they have very simple nervous systems (Fig.  2.9 ) con
sisting of a nerve ring around the esophagus and a 
number of ganglia connected to this ring. Four to 
twelve ventral cords originate from the ring and are 
irregularly connected by half-sided commissures. 
Local ganglia and nerves are found in the caudal gut 
and anal region. Some nerves extend from the esopha
geal nerve ring to the sense organs in the “head” region 
such as sensory papillae and bristles. Other sense 
organs are chemoreceptive organs called “amphidia”.  
The tiny nematode  Caenorhabditis elegans  has 
become a model organism in molecular and develop
mental neurobiology by the work of the South African 
molecular neurobiologist Sydney Brenner and col
leagues  [  19, 20  ] , a reason being the fact that it has a 
very simple nervous system composed of exactly 302 
neurons. The basic genetic features and the connectiv
ity of this nervous system was completely mapped by 
those authors and subsequent studies explored the neu
ral and molecular mechanisms responsible for a vari
ety of behaviors shown by  C.elegans   [  21  ] .
Arthropods are by far the largest (about 1.2 million 
species described, more than ten million estimated) 
and most diverse group of animals. They are divided 
into protoarthropods (onychophorans, possibly tardi
grades) and euarthropods (chelicerates, crustaceans, 
myriapods, and hexapods, the latter three taxa called 
“mandibulates”). Their taxonomy is not fully 
established. 
Like annelids, arthropods have a ventral, regularly 
segmented, paired “ladder-type” nerve cord. Based on 
the new taxonomy of protostomes mentioned above, 
this organization either has evolved independently in 
the lophotrochozoans and ecdysozoans from an unseg
mented “ur-bilaterian” nervous system or was ances
tral and has been lost in many cases  [  11  ] . In all 
arthropods, the  fi rst ganglia have fused into a complex 
brain. In mandibulates there are three major brain divi
sions, i.e., a proto-, deuto-, and tritocerebrum. The pro
tocerebrum is associated with the paired optic lobes, 
the deutocerebrum with the  fi rst and the tritocerebrum 
with the second pair of antennae. Mandibulates display 
a subesophageal ganglion having formed by fusion of 
the three  fi rst ventral ganglia. They supply the mouth 
region and mandibles, in crustaceans the  fi rst and sec
ond maxillae, in insects the maxillae, mandibles and 
labium. Caudal ganglia of the ventral cords exhibit a 
strong tendency to fuse and to form specialized abdo
minal structures  [  22  ] .
Extant Chelicerata (about 100,000 species) comprise 
the Arachnida (spiders, scorpions, mites, and others) 
and Xiphosura (horseshoe crabs). They all possess 
specialized feeding appendages called chelicerae (claw 
horns), while lacking antennae. The CNS of the cheli
cerates is characterized by the absence of a deutocere
brum because of lack of antennae; the tritocerebrum 
supplies the chelicerae. In xiphosurans, scorpions, and 
araneans (spiders) there is an increasing tendency 
towards fusion of ganglia during ontogeny. In many 
species of these groups the entire chain of ventral gan
glia forms a compact mass around the mouth, in the 
araneans below the brain. 
The brain (supraesophageal ganglion) of arachnids 
consists of a protocerebrum and tritocerebrum. In the 
anterior median part of the protocerebrum, corpora 
pedunculata (“mushroom bodies”) are found, which – 
in contrast to insects – are exclusively visual neuropils 
associated with the secondary eyes. A central body is 
found in the posterodorsal part and is probably an inte
grative center for visual information from the main eyes. 
The homology of both the corpora pedunculata and the 
central body of arachnids with those of insects remains 
uncertain  [  22  ] . The tritocerebrum is the ganglion linked 
with the chelicerae and is often fused with the subesophageal mass supplying the legs. This mass is found below 
the brain. It consists of a highly variable number of 
fused ventral ganglia (16 in araneans) (Fig   .  2.10 ).  
Arachnids have a large variety of sense organs. 
There are vibration-sensitive slit-like lyriform organs 
involved in the detection of vibration and in proprio
ception and hair sensilla called “trichobothria” on the 
legs and lateral and dorsal parts of the body, which are 
involved in the detection of airborne vibration and air 
currents. Species differ in number of main and second
ary eyes. The main eyes are considered homologous to 
the ocelli, and the secondary eyes to the compound 
eyes of insects. 
Crustaceans (crabs, lobsters, cray fi sh, shrimp, krill, 
and barnacles; totaling >50,000 species) with the larg
est group Malacostraca (crabs, lobsters, cray fi sh) have 
a typical paired “ladder-type” nerve cord as the ances
tral form. The brain (supraesophageal ganglion) is 
linked via two connectives with the ventral nerve 
cords. The protocerebrum consists of two lateral optic 
lobes and the median protocerebrum containing the 
anterior and posterior optic neuropils, the protocere
bral bridge, and the central body. Neuropils of the optic 
lobes are highly variable. In decapod crustaceans (e.g., 
crabs), there are additional visual neuropils within the 
optic lobes, i.e., a terminal medulla and the so-called 
hemiellipsoid bodies, which some authors conceive to 
be homologous to the insect mushroom bodies (see 
below). Both include a varying number of complex 
neuropils; most of them contain glomeruli. The hemiel
lipsoid bodies and some of the other neuropils have 
connections with the accessory and olfactory lobes of 
the deutocerebrum. The deutocerebrum contains the 
medial and lateral neuropils receiving vestibular and 
mechanosensory input from the  fi rst antennae, the 
olfactory and parolfactory lobes (the latter with 
unknown input), and the lateral glomeruli. The tritoce
rebrum receives information from the second antennae 
and sends motor nerves to them. There are strong dif
ferences in the degree of fusion of ventral cord ganglia. 
A subesophageal ganglion controlling mouth append
ages is found in many malacostracans, and the fusion 
of ganglia is maximal in crabs. 
Crustaceans have a large number of sense organs. 
These comprise proprioceptive mechanoreceptors of 
leg joints, the chordotonal organs. The surface includ
ing distal limbs and antennae is covered with mech
ano- and chemoreceptors possessing sensilla or setae. 
Only malacostracans have vestibular organs. An 
unpaired nauplius eye, frontal simple eyes and com
pound eyes are found, the latter are located either 
directly on the head or on eyes elevated on movable 
stalks. The compound eyes can consist of a few or sev
eral 1,000 ommatidia.
Insects are the largest group of arthropods, with an 
estimated 6–10 million species, most of which are ter
restrial (as opposed to crustaceans). The nervous sys
tem of insects consists of a brain (supraesophageal 
ganglion) and ventral nerve cords (Fig.  2.11 ). The 
brain, formed by fusion of the  fi rst three ganglia, 
consists of a large protocerebrum, a smaller deutocer
ebrum, and a very small tritocerebrum. Fiber tracts 
connect the brain with the subesophageal ganglion, 
constituted by fusion of the  fi rst three ventral cord gan
glia. The protocerebrum consists of two hemispheres, 
which are continuous with the lateral optic lobes 
receiving input from the compound eyes. Terminal 
fields of the nerves from the ocelli are found in the 
posterior median protocerebrum. The central complex 
and the  corpora pedunculata  or “mushroom bodies” 
(MB), are located in the median protocerebrum (see 
below). The MB receive olfactory input from the 
antennae via the antennal lobes situated in the deutoce
rebrum and the antennocerebral tract (ACT). In 
hymenopterans (bees, wasps, ants) the MB also receive 
visual projections from the optic lobes, which termi
nate in the calyces of the MB. The optic tubercle is 
also found in the median protocerebrum which receives 
visual input from the optic lobes. These structures are 
connected with the ventral cords via descending tracts. 
The smaller deutocerebrum is connected with the pro
tocerebrum by a supraesophageal commissure. 
Mechanoreceptive  fi bers terminate in its dorsal lobe. 
Here, the antennal lobe is found as terminal  fi eld of 
olfactory afferents from the antennae. Projection neu
rons of the antennal lobe send axons to the MB and to 
the protocerebral lobe of the protocerebrum via ACT. 
The deutocerebrum gives rise to the sensory and motor 
antennal nerves. The small tritocerebrum is related to 
taste perception and origin of the frontal connectives 
and the labral nerves.  
The chain of ventral cord ganglia consists of 
subesophageal, thoracic, and abdominal ganglia. The 
f
 i rst innervates the mandibles, maxillae, and labium 
as well as the neck musculature. It is also involved in 
the innervations of the salivary glands, the corpora 
allata (endocrine glands producing the juvenile hor
mone), and the frontal ganglion and is considered a 
higher motor center for the initiation and control of 
behavior. Most insects have three thoracic ganglia: a 
pro-, meso-, and metathoracic ganglion supplying 
legs and wings, if present, with sensory and motor 
nerves. Abdominal ganglia (11 in the embryonic 
stage) are reduced and fused during development. 
The visual system of insects comprises the retina of 
the compound eye and three optic neuropils, the lamina, 
medulla, and lobula complex, which in  fl ies and 
butter fl ies is divided into a lobula and lobula plate. In 
addition to the compound eyes, insects have dorsal eyes, 
so-called ocelli, which are simple lens eyes and thought 
to exert steering functions during walking and  fl ight. 
Antennae bear mechanosensitive, olfactory, 
hygroreceptive, and temperature-sensitive receptors. 
The neuropil of the antennal lobe in the deutocerebrum 
contains a species-speci fi c number of glomeruli, in 
which sensory afferents and interneurons make con
tacts. Macroglomeruli are found in some male insects 
related to sexual pheromone processing. 
The MBs in hymenopterans are composed of one 
calyx or two calyces (a medial and a  lateral one) and a 
peduncle consisting of two lobes, alpha and beta. The 
somata of neurons (“Kenyon cells”, bees having around 
300,000) together with their axons (“Kenyon  fi bers”) 
form the peduncle; the neuronal somata are located in 
the outer rim of the calyx. The Kenyon  fi bers split up – one collateral enters the  a , and another the  b  lobe. In 
the honeybee, the calyces exhibit three vertically 
arranged regions, the lip, collar, and basal ring region. 
Afferents from the antennal lobe terminate in the lip 
region, afferents from the medulla and lobula of the 
optic neuropils terminate in the collar region, and the 
basal ring region receives collaterals from both affer
ents as well as from the subesophageal ganglion. The 
a  and  b  lobes send  fi bers to the median protocerebrum 
between the two MBs, the protocerebral lobe lateral to 
the MB, the contralateral MB, the optic tubercle and 
back to their own calyces. In hymenopterans, the MB 
represents a highly complex multimodal center that 
forms the neural basis of processing and integrating 
olfactory/visual and mechanosensory information and 
enables learning (mostly olfactory and visual), com
plex cognitive functions, and complex behavior such 
as navigation  [  26  ] . Their output has sensory, move
ment-related, and sensorimotor functions. MBs differ 
substantially across species. For example,  Drosophila
 only has a single cup, and spatially segregated  a ,  b , 
and  l  lobes. 
The central complex of insects consists of four neu
ropils, i.e., the protocerebral bridge, an upper division 
(in  Drosophila  called fan-shaped body), a lower divi
sion (in  Drosophila  called ellipsoid body), and the 
paired nodules. It receives strong visual as well as 
mechanosensory input, but only weak input from the 
MB. Their precise function is still unclear, but the cen
tral complex has to do with premotor integration, ori
entation, and control of complex locomotion and path 
integration. 
The homology of the MB and the central bodies 
(CB) or central complexes in arthropods is debated. 
The CB of insects and crustaceans are probably homol
ogous, whereas homology with CB of chelicerates is 
controversial. The same holds for the MB in insects 
and crustaceans (here called hemiellipsoid body), on 
the one hand, and of chelicerates, on the other, partly 
because in the latter, the MB receive only visual input. 
Some authors place the MB of chelicerates closer to 
those of onychophorans  [  27  ] . Accordingly, the MB of
onychophorans and chelicerates would have evolved 
independently of those of the mandibulates or 
underwent substantial functional and structural changes 
in their ancestral organization. 
As illustrated in Fig.  2.12 , the superphylum 
Deuterostomia, i.e., animals with a “secondary mouth”, 
comprise the phyla Echinodermata, Xenoturbellaria 
(not shown), Hemichordata, and Chordata. The split 
between protostomes and deuterostomes has happened 
in Precambrian time about 560 mya.
The Echinodermata (star fi sh, sea urchins, sand dollars, 
brittle stars, sea cucumbers, and feather stars, together 
about 6,300 species) are radially symmetric (pentara
dial) animals at the adult stage. The radial symmetry of 
body and nervous system appears to be secondary, 
since echinoderms most probably derive from bilater
ally symmetric ancestors, as is re fl ected by their bilat
eral larva. The nervous system is composed of a 
sensory ectoneural nerve ring of ectodermal origin sur
rounding the mouth, and a motor hyponeural system of 
mesodermal origin, from which radial nerves enter the 
arms and the rest of the body coordinating the move
ment of the animal. The connection between the two 
systems is unclear.
Hemichordates (with the classes Enteropneusta and 
Pterobranchia; 100 species) are wormlike or sessile 
marine animals with a primitive or secondarily 
simpli fi ed nervous system consisting of a dorsal and 
ventral nerve cord interpreted by some authors to be 
homologous to the spinal cord of chordates, while oth
ers consider it a result of independent evolution. 
The phylum Chordata consists of the Cephalochordata 
(lancelets), Urochordata (tunicates), and Craniata (cf. 
Fig.  2.12 ). They all possess, at least at some point of 
their life, a chorda dorsalis or notochord, i.e., a  fl exible 
cartilaginous rod, and a hollow dorsal nerve or “spi
nal” cord.
Cephalochordates (21 species, e.g., the lancelet 
Branchiostoma , previously called  Amphioxus ) possess 
a neural plate, but no neural crest or placodes and, as a 
consequence, no head. Recent studies based on neural 
gene expression patterns  [  28  ]  reveal that the neural 
tube and its rostral “cerebral vesicle” are homologous 
with most parts of the vertebrate CNS, i.e., a spinal 
cord, a rhombencephalon, mesencephalon, and dien
cephalon and perhaps parts of a telencephalon, which 
is connected with the unpaired frontal eye. Urochordates 
(2,200 species) are sessile animals having a free-swim
ming larva and a very primitive nervous system, prob
ably as a consequence of secondary simpli fi cation 
related to their sessile life style.
The group Craniata (i.e., animals with a skull) com
prises the Myxinoidea and all members of the subphy
lum Vertebrata including the group Petromyzontida 
(lampreys) (cf. Fig.  2.12 ). Myxinoids and petromyzon
tids have no jaws and are, therefore, often called 
Agnatha, i.e., jawless  fi shes. 
Myxinoids (hag fi shes; about 60 species) are eel-like 
exoparasites with a well-developed olfactory and mech
anosensory system – no lateral-line system as in all 
other aquatic vertebrates – and have degenerated eyes.
As shown in Fig.  2.12 , the subphylum Vertebrata com
prises the classes Petromyzontida (about 50 species), 
Chondrichthyes (cartilaginous  fi shes, i.e., sharks, rays, 
skates and chimaeras, about 1,100 species), 
Osteichthyes (bony  fi shes, i.e., actinopterygian, bra
chiopterygian, and sarcopterygian  fi shes, the latter 
comprising lung fi shes and crossopterygians; together 
more than 30,000 species), Amphibia (frogs, 
salamanders, caecilians, about 6,000 species), 
“Reptilia” (chelonians, i.e., turtles; rhynchocephalians, 
i.e., the tuatara; squamates, i.e., lizards and snakes; and 
crocodilians – together about 9,500 species), Aves 
(birds, about 10,000 species), and Mammalia (about 
5,700 species). The former class “Reptilia” is now 
considered a paraphyletic taxon, i.e., one without a 
common ancestor, because crocodilians (and the 
extinct dinosaurs) are more closely related to birds 
than to other “reptiles”. The representatives of the for
mer class “Reptilia” and birds together form the super
class Sauropsida. 
The class Mammalia comprises the three subclasses 
Prototheria (egg-laying mammals, with the single 
order Monotremata, 5 species), Metatheria or 
Marsupialia (i.e., “pouched” mammals, about 340 spe
cies), and Eutheria or Placentalia (i.e., mammals with 
a placenta, 5,300 species). According to recent taxon
omy, the latter comprises the four supraorders 
Afrotheria (containing elephants, manatees, and spe
cies previously included in the now obsolete group 
“insectivores”), Xenarthra (anteaters, armadillos, 
sloths), Euarchontoglires (e.g., primates, rodents, 
hares), and Laurasiatheria (including bats, carnivores, 
ungulates, cetaceans, and certain species previously 
referred to “insectivores”). 
The CNS of craniates reveals a highly uniform 
organization  [  29, 30  ]  (Figs.  2.13  and  2.14a–j ). In its 
hypothetical ancestral form, it exhibits the “standard” 
organization into the three: prosencephalon, mesen
cephalon, and rhombencephalon. Whether such a tri
partite organization, occurring in lophotrochozoans as 
well as ecdysozoans, is due to “deep homology” found 
in all bilaterians  [  11  ]  or to convergent evolution, is 
debated. All extant craniates have brains consisting of 
a rhombencephalon composed of a myelencephalon or 
medulla oblongata, and a metencephalon including a 
cerebellum, a mesencephalon (midbrain) including an 
isthmic region, and a prosencephalon composed of a 
diencephalon (or “primary prosencephalon”) and a tel
encephalon (or “secondary prosencephalon” – end
brain). Medulla oblongata and mesencephalon together 
form the “brainstem”. It is now generally accepted that 
most parts of the brain like the spinal cord have a  seg
mental organization  (Fig.  2.15 ). The rhombencepha
lon consists of rhombomeres R1–7, the mesencephalon 
is composed of an isthmic neuromer and a mesenceph
alic neuromer proper, the diencephalon (as “primary 
prosencephalon”) and at least ventral parts of the
telencephalon (as “secondary prosencephalon”) are 
segmented into six prosomeres P1–6. The exact seg
mentation of the telencephalon dorsal and rostral to P6 
into pallial and subpallial regions has yet to be 
determined.    
 The  medulla spinalis  consists of an inner gray sub
stance around the central canal consisting mostly of 
nerve cells covered by white substance containing den
drites and ascending and descending nerve  fi bers. The 
gray substance is divided into a dorsal somatosensory 
and viscerosensory region and a ventral visceromotor 
and somatomotor region. Nerve cells innervate the 
various parts of the body via spinal nerves in a seg
mental fashion. 
 The  medulla oblongata  reveals the same dorsoven
tral organization as the medulla spinalis and contains, 
in all vertebrates, from dorsal to ventral: somatosen
sory, viscerosensory, visceromotor, and sensorimotor 
areas and nuclei of the cranial nerves V to X. Tetrapod 
vertebrates (amphibians, “reptiles”, birds, and mam
mals) also have the additional cranial nerves XI ( N. 
accessorius ) and XII ( N. hypoglossus ). The dorsal sen
sory roots of the cranial nerves include ganglia con
taining the somata of sensory neurons. The regions of 
sensory nuclei may undergo strong enlargement and 
complication, as, for instance, in gold fi sh with the gus
tatory vagal lobe and its highly evolved gustatory sys
tem. A mechano- and electroreceptive lateral-line 
system associated with cranial nerves is present in all 
vertebrates and was lost in some terrestrial amphibians 
and in all amniotes, i.e., in “reptiles”, birds, and 
mammals. 
 The  reticular formation system  is found inside the 
medulla oblongata, the pons (only in mammals, though 
birds have evolved a somewhat similar structure 
independently), and in the tegmental midbrain. It is 
relatively uniform among vertebrates and contains
important neuromodulator-producing centers such as 
the  noradrenergic  locus coeruleus  and the serotonergic 
raphe  nuclei. The reticular formation controls centers 
for breathing and cardiovascular activity and gives rise 
to an ascending activation system for vigilance, aware
ness, and consciousness. A  pons  (“bridge”) is found 
only in mammals and is situated in the rostral medulla 
oblongata and caudal tegmentum. It contains relay 
nuclei of  fi ber bundles that connect the cerebral cortex 
and the cerebellum. However, similar pathways and 
nuclei are likewise found in birds, but most likely 
developed independently. 
 The  cerebellum  is a formation of the dorsal meten
cephalon and present in all vertebrates, but absent in 
myxinoids, perhaps due to secondary loss. In all verte
brates except petromyzontids, it exhibits a uniform 
three-layered organization, i.e., a deep small-celled 
granular layer, a large-celled layer of Purkinje cells, 
and a peripheral molecular layer. The vestibulolateral 
lobes of the cerebellum processing primary vestibular 
and – if present – mechano- and electroreceptive lat
eral-line information are present in all vertebrates. 
A   corpus cerebelli  is found in cartilaginous and bony 
f
 i shes and terrestrial vertebrates and has undergone 
hypertrophy in some groups of cartilaginous  fi shes, 
and is strongly reduced in size in amphibians. In some 
actinopterygian  fi shes, predominantly in electric  fi sh, 
there is a strong enlargement of parts of the cerebel
lum, the  valvula   [  34  ] . Mammals have novel lateral cer
ebellar structures, the  cerebellar hemispheres , receiving 
telencephalo-pontine input. Besides vestibular, soma
tosensory, and sensorimotor functions, the cerebellum 
of mammals, and perhaps of birds, is likewise involved 
in “higher” cognitive functions such as thinking and 
action planning as well as language in humans. 
 The  mesencephalon  consists, from dorsal to ven
tral, of the:  tectum  (in mammals called “colliculi 
superiores”), the  torus semicircularis  (in mammals 
called “colliculi inferiores”), and the  tegmentum . In 
all craniates, except mammals, the tectum is the major 
visual processing and integration center. In its ances
tral state, it exhibits a laminar organization consisting 
of alternating cellular and  fi ber layers. The absence of 
such lamination in some vertebrates such as salaman
ders, caecilians, and South American and African 
lung fi shes is a consequence of secondary simpli fi cation 
 [  35  ] . Besides visual input, other sensory information 
such as auditory and – if present – mechano- and elec
trosensory information originating in the torus semi
circularis terminate in deeper layers of the tectum and 
contribute to a multimodal representation for orienta
tion in space. Likewise, telencephalic efferents termi
nate in the tectum of cartilaginous and bony  fi shes and 
of terrestrial vertebrates. Main tectal efferents descend 
to the medulla oblongata/pons and medulla spinalis 
(tectobulbar and tectospinal tracts, respectively). 
 The  torus semicircularis  is, in its plesiomorphic 
state, the midbrain relay station for auditory, mech
ano-, and electrosensitive projections ascending to the 
diencephalon and telencephalon (cf. Fig.  2.16d ). Like 
the tectum, it is characterized by a laminar organiza
tion, which is most spectacular in electric  fi sh  [  29  ]  
(cf. Fig.  2.17 ).   
 The  tegmentum  is involved in (pre)motor functions 
and exhibits a number of specialties. One ancient com
ponent is the nucleus of the oculomotor nerve (cranial 
nerve III), which is absent in myxinoids, but present in 
all vertebrates. In the tegmentum, massive  fi ber tracts 
descending from the cortex to the pons, medulla oblon
gata, and medulla spinalis are found (corticopontine 
tracts and pyramidal tract). The tegmentum contains 
the dopaminergic  substantia nigra  exhibiting recipro
cal connections with the telencephalic striatum, and 
the premotor  nucleus ruber . The latter receives crossed 
efferents from the cerebellum and gives rise to crossed 
descending motor tracts to the spinal cord (rubrospinal 
tracts). 
 The  diencephalon  is divided from dorsal to ventral 
into the epithalamus, thalamus, and hypothalamus 
(Fig.  2.16c ). The  epithalamus  contains the  habenular 
nuclei , which are important parts of the limbic system 
and present in all craniates. They project, via the 
fasciculus retro fl exus, to the midbrain tegmentum. In 
many craniates, the epithalamus carries the pineal 
organ or “epiphysis”, a small endocrine gland releasing 
the hormone melatonin, which affects wake-sleep pat
terns and seasonal functions. The  thalamus  is com
posed of a dorsal and a ventral part and the posterior 
tuberculum. In all craniates, the  dorsal thalamus
 receives visual, somatosensory, auditory, and gustatory 
information, either directly (e.g., from the eyes) or 
indirectly via brainstem relay centers, and sends them 
to telencephalic regions. Visual pathways terminate in 
the dorsal pallium of  fi shes, amphibians, “reptiles”, 
and birds and in the occipital cortex of mammals. 
In “reptiles” and birds, auditory as well as visual and 
somatosensory pathways terminate in a special region 
of the lateral telencephalon called  dorsal ventricular 
ridge  (DVR) in “reptiles” and  mesonidopallium  in 
birds. The thalamus has undergone a strong enlarge
ment in amniotes, particularly mammals and birds, and 
became parcellated into many nuclei related to sensory, 
cognitive, and motor as well as limbic functions. In 
mammals (Fig.  2.18 ), visual functions are relayed by 
the corpus geniculatum laterale, auditory functions by 
the corpus geniculatum mediale, both projecting to the 
primary visual and auditory cortex, respectively. Ray
f
 i nned  fi shes have independently developed a projec
tion from the posterior tuberculum of the diencephalon 
to the pallium. The  ventral thalamus  and subthalamus 
(zona incerta) of mammals projects to telencephalic 
parts of the basal ganglia, i.e., corpus striatum and glo
bus pallidus, and to the hippocampus. The  hypothala
mus  and its appendage, the  pituitary  ( hypophysis ), are 
the main hormone-based control centers for basal 
homeostatic functions. Cartilaginous and bony  fi shes 
exhibit a hypertrophy of the lateral hypothalamus 
( lobus inferior hypothalami ), with unknown 
functions.  
The evolution of the  telencephalon  in craniates is 
not fully understood. In all craniates, it receives olfac
tory information from the olfactory bulb as the only 
direct sensory input. Comparative neuroanatomists, 
therefore, previously believed that in its ancestral state 
the telencephalon had to be considered the “olfactory 
brain”. Later it was found that in all craniates the
telencephalon also receives information from other 
senses, e.g., visual, auditory, and mechanosensory via 
pathways ascending from the diencephalon (see above), 
and the telencephalon was regarded “multimodal” in 
its ancestral state. Recent studies, however, revealed 
that in all craniates except birds and mammals these 
nonolfactory sensory afferents to the telencephalon are 
either multimodal or do not form topographic repre
sentations. This would imply that the development of 
topographic representations of thalamic sensory affer
ents to pallial/cortical regions has happened indepen
dently in birds and mammals and would again 
strengthen the “olfactory brain” interpretation. 
The telencephalon of all craniates is composed of 
a pallium and a ventral subpallium (“pallium” means 
“mantle”) surrounding the paired telencephalic ven
tricles, which in its ancestral form of tetrapods is 
clearly visible in the amphibian brain ( [  35  ]  cf. 
Fig.  2.19 ). With the exception of petromyzontids, the 
pallium is divided into a medial, dorsal, lateral, and 
ventral pallium, and the subpallium into a septal and a 
striato-pallidal region, the latter including parts of the 
amygdala involved in limbic-autonomic functions (in 
mammals the “central amygdala”). In “reptiles”, pal
lial divisions are called medial, dorsal, and lateral 
cortex and dorsal ventricular ridge (see below). The 
medial pallium/cortex of amphibians and sauropsids 
corresponds to the hippocampal formation of mam
mals, the lateral pallium to the olfactory (in mammals 
“piriform”) cortex, and the ventral pallium to the 
vomeronasal pallium. 
The ontogeny of the telencephalon of actinoptery
gian (ray- fi nned)  fi shes deviates from that of other cra
niates  [  34  ] ; Fig.  2.19 . In the latter, the unpaired 
embryonic telencephalon extends laterally and forms 
two hemispheres through  evagination  resulting in an 
arrangement of a medial, dorsal, lateral, and ventral 
pallium, and a subpallium around the ventricles. 
In contrast, in actinopterygians two hemispheres are 
formed by  eversion  in such a way that parts of the brain 
which in the evagination type are found medially and 
dorsally, occupy a ventrolateral position. These differ
ences in ontogeny contribute to the dif fi culty with 
homologizing parts of the telencephalon of actinop
terygian  fi shes and other vertebrates.  
In sauropsids, the lateral parts of the pallium have 
developed into a large structure, the  dorsal ventricular 
ridge , DVR, which bulges in medial direction into 
the ventricles and for a long time was considered part 
of the corpus striatum as the major telencephalic 
component of the basal ganglia (Fig.  2.20 ). Accordingly, 
parts of the DVR of birds were called e ctostriatum ,  
neostriatum , and  hyperstriatum . Today it is generally 
accepted that the DVR is not homologous to the stria
tum, but is of pallial origin  [  37  ] .  
However, as illustrated in Fig.  2.21 , there is a debate 
whether the DVR and the mesonidopallium of birds 
are homologous to the lateral cortex or the claustrum 
of mammals and ventral pallium of amphibians  [  38, 
39  ] . In the latter case, different parts of the dorsal tel
encephalon would give rise to centers involved in intel
ligence and other mental abilities (see below).  
The dorsal pallium of myxinoids exhibits a 
f
 i ve-layered structure, which has developed inde
pendently of other lamination patterns found in crani
ates (see below). The pallium of cartilaginous and 
actinopterygian  fi shes is unlaminated. The medial and 
dorsal pallium of lung fi shes (dipnoans) displays some 
lamination, while the pallium of amphibians is gener
ally unlaminated despite extensive cell migration in 
medial and dorsal parts  [  29  ] ; cf. Fig.  2.18a, b . In the 
medial, dorsomedial, and dorsal cortex of “reptiles” 
there is a three- to four-fold lamination, which how
ever, is discontinuous and not comparable in its cyto
architecture to the laminated cortex of mammals (cf. 
Fig.  2.20 ). In birds, the dorsally situated hyperpallium 
is considered homologous to the visual, auditory, and 
somatosensory cortex of mammals, while the meso-/
 nidopallium of birds is considered to be homologous 
either to the lateral (temporal) isocortex or a derivative 
of the ventral pallium of amphibian-reptilian ances
tors. In birds, both the hyperpallium and meso-/nidop
allium are unlaminated (Fig.  2.22 ).  
Mammals in general possess a six-layered cortex 
called “isocortex” (Fig.  2.23 ) and a 3- to 5-layered 
“allocortex” or limbic cortex. The evolution of the 
mammalian cortex is unclear, but its laminar organiza
tion appears to have evolved independently of the lam
ination occurring in the pallia of other craniates and 
probably evolved from a three-layered olfactory cor
tex. A common organizational principle of the mam
malian cortex is the parcellation into functionally 
different (sensory, motor, integrative) areas. In small 
mammalian brains, the number of such areas is low, 
having about 10 primary sensory and motor areas 
without signs of integrative-associative areas; cf.  [  41  ] . 
The number of cortical areas increases with cortex vol
ume in most mammals and all primates. Concurrently, 
the relative sizes of cortical areas are supposed to 
decrease. The human cortex is assumed to possess 150 
areas and 60 connections per area resulting in 9,000 
area-area connections  [  42  ] .  
The subpallium/subcortex of vertebrates consists 
of a large striatopallidum ( nucleus caudatus  and 
putamen , together forming the “corpus striatum”, 
and  globus pallidus  in mammals; cf. Fig.  2.17 ) as the 
main component of the basal ganglia, a subcortical 
amygdalar complex, and a medially situated septal 
region. The amygdala of vertebrates consists of a 
portion exerting autonomic-limbic functions (“cen
tral amygdala”) as well as olfactory and vomerona
sal functions (cortical and medial amygdala of 
mammals, respectively). In addition, in mammals a 
basolateral amygdala has evolved, with strong recip
rocal connections to the isocortex and limbic cortex 
as well as afferents from the sensory nuclei of the 
thalamus.
The basic organization of the brain is surprisingly uni
form across all vertebrate taxa, as described above. 
Besides the development of structures for the process
ing of specialized senses such as the vagal and facial 
lobe (taste) or the valvula cerebelli (electroreception) 
in teleost  fi shes, major changes are observed in the tel
encephalic roof, i.e., pallium or cortex. However, one 
of the most striking differences concerns absolute 
brain size (ABS), which in vertebrates varies from 
1 mg (or mm 3 ) in miniaturized  fi shes and amphibians 
up to 8,000 g in the false killer whale, which is a range 
of almost seven orders of magnitude (Table  2.1 ).  
The classes of craniates likewise differ markedly in 
brain size relative to body size (RBS) (Fig.  2.24 ). The 
smallest RBS is found in agnathans (myxinoids and 
petromyzontids), followed by bony  fi shes, amphibians, 
“reptiles”, and cartilaginous  fi shes, the latter having 
surprisingly large brains. Mammals and birds, on aver
age, have brains that are about ten times larger than 
those of the other groups of craniates of the same body 
size. In birds, parrots (Psittacidae) and corvids 
(Corvidae) have 6–10 times larger brains than other 
birds. Among mammals, primates (with the exception 
of prosimians) generally have larger brains than the 
other orders with the same body size. In primates, pro
simians and tarsiers have relatively small brains with 
an average of 6.7 g, followed by New World monkeys 
with an average of 45 g and Old World monkeys at an 
average of 115 g, with the largest monkey brains found 
in baboons. Among apes, gibbons have brain sizes 
(88–105 g) which fall within the range of Old World 
monkeys, while the large apes (orangutans, gorillas, 
chimpanzees) have brain weights between 330 and 
570 g (males)  [  47  ] .  
Brain size in vertebrates is mostly determined (more 
than 90 %) by body size  [  48  ] . However, brain size does 
not increase proportionally with body size, but “lags 
behind”, i.e., with an exponent (or allometric 
coef fi cient) of 0.6–0.8, which is due to the fact that 
with an increase in body size brains become absolutely 
larger, but relatively smaller – this is called  negative 
brain allometry   [  44  ] . As a consequence, in small mice 
or insectivores brain volume may constitute 10 % or 
more of body volume, while in the blue whale, the 
largest living animal, the brain makes up only 0.01 % 
or even less of body mass  [  49  ] ; (Fig.  2.25 ). Primates, 
in general, have higher RBS than all other groups of 
mammals.  
The human brain has a weight of 1,250–1,450 g on 
average and represents about 2 % of body mass. 
Although the human brain is neither exceptional in 
ABS or RBS, it is unusually large in terms of body 
size. This can be demonstrated using various statistical 
methods, e.g., the encephalization quotient EQ, which 
indicates the extent to which the brain size of a given 
species  Ea
  deviates from the expected brain size  Ee
 ;cf. 
 [  44  ] . Within primates, humans have the highest EQ of 
7.4–7.8, meaning that the human brain is 7–8 times 
larger than that of an average mammal of the same 
body size (Table  2.1 ). They are followed by the mon
keys  Cebus  and  Saimiri  with EQs of 4.8 and 2.8, 
respectively, while chimpanzees and orangutans have 
low (1.7 and 1.9, respectively) and gorillas very low 
EQs (1.5). Other mammals have EQs between 0.4 (rat) 
and 1.3 (elephant). 
During mammalian brain evolution, all parts 
increased in size relative to the body, except the olfac
tory system. However, the telencephalon as well as the 
cerebellum underwent a faster growth than the other 
parts resulting in  positive allometry  (i.e., with an 
exponent larger than 1;  [  50  ] ). Inside the telencephalon, 
the cortex has grown faster both in surface and thick
ness. However, while the increase in surface was 
10,000-fold (from 0.8 cm 2  in “insectivore”-like species 
to 7,400 cm 2  in whales), cortical thickness increased 
only slightly, from 0.5 mm in mice to 3 mm in  Homo 
sapiens . Interestingly, mammals with much larger 
brains and consequently cortical surfaces such as ele
phants and cetaceans (whales and dolphins) have 
unusually thin cortices of 1.5 and 1 mm, respectively. 
 In all mammalian cortices, cortical cell density 
decreases with increasing cortex volume, but primates 
in general have higher densities (around 50,000 cells 
per mm 3 ) than expected compared to other mammals – elephants and cetaceans have the lowest cortical cell 
densities (6,000–7,000 cells per mm 3 ). Humans com
bine a relatively large brain, a very thick cortex with a 
relatively high cortical cellular density (about 30,000 
cells per mm 3 ) which results in the fact that they have 
considerably more cortical neurons (about 15 billion) 
than elephants and cetaceans with their much bigger 
brains (11 and 10.5 billion, respectively), which is the 
highest number of cortical neurons found in animals 
 [  51, 52  ] .
 The earliest human-like primates, the australopith
ecines (such as “Lucy”,  Australopithecus afarensis ) 
existed in East Africa at about 3–4 mya and had a 
brain volume of 400–450 cm 3 , which is equal to or 
only slightly larger than that of present chimpanzees 
(see Fig.  2.26 ). A strong increase in brain volume 
occurred only with the appearance of  Homo habilis
 about 2 mya having 700 cm 3 . This means that brain 
size of our ancestors remained constant for 1.5 mya 
despite strong environmental changes. The next 
strong increase in brain size occurred 1.8 mya with 
the appearance of  Homo erectus , who had a brain 
volume of 800–1,000 cm 3 . The appearance of early 
forms of  Homo sapiens  about 400,000 years ago with 
brain volumes between 1,100 and 1,500 cm 3  repre
sents the latest step of brain evolution in hominins. 
Importantly, not  Homo sapiens , but  Homo neander
thalensis , with 1,400–1,900 cm 3  had the largest brain 
of all hominins and primates. The reasons for this 
dramatic increase in brain size in a relatively short 
evolutionary time are unclear despite a large number 
of scenarios. 
In humans, intelligence is commonly de fi ned as men
tal capacities such as abstract thinking, understand
ing, communication, reasoning, learning, and memory 
formation, action planning, and problem solving 
 [  51  ] . Usually, human intelligence is measured by 
intelligence tests and expressed in intelligence quo
tient (IQ) values expressing different contents (e.g., 
visual-spatial, verbal, numerical). Evidently, such a 
de fi nition and measurement of intelligence cannot be 
applied directly to nonhuman animals, because any 
test depending on verbalization is inapplicable. A 
number of comparative and evolutionary psycholo
gists and cognitive ecologists converge on the view 
that mental or behavioral   fl exibility  is a good measure 
of intelligence culminating in the appearance of novel 
solutions not part of the animal’s normal repertoire 
 [  53, 54  ] . 
Intelligence de fi ned in such a manner has developed 
several times independently during evolution, e.g., in 
cephalopods (e.g.,  Octopus ), social insects (e.g., the 
honeybee), some teleost  fi shes (e.g., cichlids), some 
birds (corvids and parrots), and mammals. In all these 
cases, high intelligence is coupled with ( i ) larger to 
much larger brains as compared to less intelligent 
members of the respective taxon, ( ii ) specialized brain
centers with a high number of densely packed and 
interconnected neurons, and ( iii ) structures and mecha
nisms for fast information processing, e.g., the vertical 
and subvertical lobe of  Octopus , the mushroom bodies 
in the honeybee, the mesonidopallium of corvids, and 
the isocortex of primates. Primates are, on average, 
more intelligent than other mammals and all other ani
mals, with the great apes and  fi nally humans at the far 
end. Because of higher relative cortex volume and 
higher neuron packing density (NPD), primates have 
considerably more cortical neurons than other mam
mals of the same brain size. Likewise, information pro
cessing capacity (IPC) is generally higher in primates 
due to short interneuronal distance and high axon con
duction velocity. Finally, primate cortices exhibit 
extensive parcellation according to the principle of 
intense local and sparse global connectivity  [  52  ] . 
Across taxa, differences in intelligence correlates 
best with differences in number of pallial or cortical 
neurons and synapses plus processing speed. The 
human brain combines large cortical volume with 
reasonable NPD, high conduction velocity, and high 
cortical parcellation. Cetaceans and elephants have 
much larger brains than even humans, but less cortical 
neurons, because of much lower NPD. This could 
explain why cetaceans and elephants are not as intel
ligent as one would expect on the basis of brain size. 
The contrary is the case for corvid birds with very 
small brains, but high NPD and IPC, which could 
explain why these animals reveal an intelligence com
parable to primates with much larger brains. All aspects 
of human intelligence are present at least in principle 
in nonhuman primates and in some other mammals 
and more distant vertebrates – except syntactical lan
guage. The latter can be regarded as a very potent 
“intelligence amplifier”.
An unsolved question in the study of evolution, in gen
eral, and of nervous systems and brains, in particular, 
is the question whether the strikingly numerous cases 
of similar structures found in sense organs and brains 
are the result of true convergent evolution ( homoplasy ) 
or of the action of “deep” homologies (see below). 
Striking examples for convergent evolution in the tra
ditional sense are the lens eye of  Octopus  and of verte
brates; the paired “ladder”-type ventral nerve cord of 
annelids and arthropods; and the tripartite brain in 
polychetes, arthropods, and (at least embryologically) 
craniates, among others. 
The concept of “deep homologies” attempts to 
describe the role of very ancient genetic mechanisms 
governing growth and differentiation processes in 
metazoans  [  11  ] . This includes so-called  homeotic 
genes  that control the differentiation of organisms 
along their body axes, of sense organs, and nervous 
systems and brains. They are found to be the same in 
very distantly related animals such as the fruit  fl y 
Drosophila  and the clawed toad  Xenopus . In  Drosophila
 (and all other insects studied) the formation of the ven
tral cords and the tritocerebrum, and in  Xenopus  (and 
all other chordates, including vertebrates) the develop
ment of the spinal cord and myelencephalon, is con
trolled by  Hox  genes. On the other hand, non Hox  genes 
( otd / Otx ) determine the formation of the proto- and 
deutocerebrum of insects and of the mes-, di-, and met
encephalon in chordates. The zone in between these 
regions, the tritocerebrum in insects and the isthmic 
region in vertebrates, is controlled by so-called  Pax
 genes in both groups  [  55  ] . These  findings could now 
 be extended to all bilaterians and even to phyla having 
lost their bilateral organization in the adult stage (echi
noderms), which leads to the assumption that all bilat
erally organized animals possess a common “bauplan” 
for a tripartite brain since about 600 mya  [  11  ] . 
Precursors of such genes have been found even in coel
enterates and sponges. 
Such a new concept radically simpli fi es many prob
lems concerning the evolution of nervous systems and 
brains, e.g., explaining the large number of seemingly 
“convergent” or “homoplastic” steps in the evolution 
of neural and sensory structures, because they appear 
to be based on the same regulatory developmental 
genes – this, however, leads to new problems, because 
an uncountable number of cases of secondary 
simpli fi cation have to be assumed. Even if there is a 
“deep” homology of such genes, the parts of the ner
vous systems and brains controlled by them may have 
developed independently, and the same or very similar 
developmental genes may have undergone a change in 
function. Furthermore, it is still unclear how the same 
regulatory genes can lead to very different structures. 
Insect and vertebrate brains have hardly any resem
blance, and the same is true for the insect compound 
eye and the vertebrate lens eye, despite similar regula
tory genes. These may represent basic organizational 
commands such as “form a tripartite brain!” or “develop 
a light-sensitive organ!”, and it is left up to epigenetic 
(i.e., gene-expression regulating) mechanisms to form 
a pigment spot, a compound eye, or a lens eye. 
At the level of bacteria and unicellular eukaryotes we 
already  fi nd a fundamental division into sensorium and 
motorium, with some sort of information processing in 
between, which involves a short-term memory and rep
resents the basic organization of “cognitive” functions. 
In the earliest eumetazoans diffuse “basi-epithelial” 
nerve nets exist similar to that found in  Hydra . From 
there, two major evolutionary trends took their course. 
The  fi rst represents a sidetrack leading to the evolution 
of ring-shaped nerve systems in cnidarians and cteno
phorans (“coelenterates”), the other is the main track 
leading to a bilaterally organized nervous system with 
a circumesophageal ganglion and ventral cords having 
originated already in Precambrian times 560 mya or 
earlier. Even planarians feature such a CNS, and at this 
level all extant neuronal mechanisms (including ion 
channels, synaptic mechanisms, and transmitters) were 
already present. Interestingly, both “coelenterates” and 
bilateral organisms possess very similar genes control
ling the body plan – including the brain. 
From the CNS of the most primitive bilaterally sym
metric animals (“ur-bilateria”), again two major evolu
tionary trends originated – one in the protostomes, the 
other in the deuterostomes. The former split into two 
evolutionary lineages: the lophotrochozoan and the 
ecdysozoan schemes – in both lines we  fi nd the  formation 
of complex sense organs and brains. Among lophotro
chozoans, this is the case for predatory platyhelminths, 
polychaetes, and likewise predatory cephalopods. Here 
we  fi nd complex lens eyes and visual systems as well as 
a multilobed supraesophageal ganglia, and the brain of 
Octopus  is regarded the most complex protostome brain. 
Among ecdysozoans, arthropods likewise exhibit highly 
complex sense organs and brains, and those of the  fl ies 
and hymenopterans (wasps, bees, ants) are considered 
the most complex ones. The deuterostomes, with an 
unresolved phylogenetic origin, likewise exhibit two 
major developmental lineages, one leading to the 
Echinodermata with radially symmetric adult nervous 
systems super fi cially resembling those of the “coelen
terates”; the other line leading via hemi-, uro-, and 
cephalochordates – all with very simple nervous sys
tems – to the craniates and eventually to the vertebrates. 
The vertebrate brain evolved very early (about 500 mya) 
and since then remained relatively uniform in its basic 
organization. Major evolutionary changes concerned 
the specialization, complication, and enlargement 
(sometimes reduction) of the different brain regions and 
formation of novel sensory systems such as gustatory, 
electroreceptive, infrared, echolocation, and visual sys
tems. The most dramatic changes occurred in the dorsal 
telencephalon (pallium, cortex) together with related 
changes in the dorsal thalamus projecting to this 
structure. 
Birds and, independently, mammals evolved uni
modal afferents to the pallium-cortex – in birds mostly 
to the dorsal ventricular ridge and in mammals to the 
isocortex forming topographically organized sensory 
and motor areas. In birds as well as in mammals there 
is a dramatic increase in brain size and in the size of 
the pallium and isocortex, in particular. Among birds 
the largest brains are found in psittacids and corvids
and among mammals the largest brains occur in pri
mates (in all cases corrected for body size) and this 
correlates roughly with the degree of cognitive abili
ties such as learning, problem solving, use and fabrica
tion of tools, imitation, insight, thinking, action 
planning, and language. Humans have the largest brain 
of all animals (corrected for body size) and in addition 
they have the largest number of cortical neurons as 
well as the most ef fi cient information-processing 
capacities among large-brained animals and so far 
appear to be the only lifeform with a grammatically 
and syntactically structured language.