In Chapters 3 and 4, we discussed how mechanical energy, such as a thumbtack
entering your foot, can be converted into a neural signal. First, specialized
ion channels of the sensory nerve endings allow positive charge to
enter the axon. If this depolarization reaches threshold, then action potentials
are generated. Because the axonal membrane is excitable and has
voltage-gated sodium channels, action potentials can propagate without
decrement up the long sensory nerves. For this information to be processed
by the rest of the nervous system, it is necessary that these neural signals
be passed on to other neurons—for example, the motor neurons that control
muscle contraction, as well as neurons in the brain and spinal cord that
lead to a coordinated reflex response. By the end of the nineteenth century,
it was recognized that this transfer of information from one neuron
to another occurs at specialized sites of contact. In 1897, English physiologist
Charles Sherrington gave these sites their name: synapses. The process
of information transfer at a synapse is called synaptic transmission.
The physical nature of synaptic transmission was argued for almost a
century. One attractive hypothesis, which nicely explained the speed of
synaptic transmission, was that it was simply electrical current flowing
from one neuron to the next. The existence of such electrical synapses
was finally proven in 1959 by Edwin Furshpan and David Potter, Harvard
University physiologists who were studying the nervous system of crayfish.
We now know that electrical synapses are common in the mammalian
brain.
An alternative hypothesis about the nature of synaptic transmission, also
dating back to the 1800s, was that chemical neurotransmitters transfer
information from one neuron to another at the synapse. Solid support for
the concept of chemical synapses was provided in 1921 by Otto Loewi,
then the head of the Pharmacology Department at the University of Graz
in Austria. Loewi showed that electrical stimulation of axons innervating
the frog’s heart caused the release of a chemical and that this chemical
could mimic the effects of neuron stimulation on the heartbeat (Box 5.1).
Later, Bernard Katz and his colleagues at University College London,
conclusively demonstrated that fast transmission at the synapse between a
motor neuron axon and skeletal muscle was chemically mediated. By 1951,
John Eccles of the Australian National University was able to study the
physiology of synaptic transmission within the mammalian central nervous
system (CNS) using a new tool, the glass microelectrode. These experiments
indicated that many CNS synapses also use a chemical transmitter.
Chemical synapses comprise the majority of synapses in the brain. During
the last decade, new methods of studying the molecules involved in synaptic
transmission have revealed that synapses are far more complex than
most neuroscientists anticipated.
Synaptic transmission is a large and fascinating topic. The actions of
psychoactive drugs, the causes of mental disorders, the neural bases of
learning and memory—indeed, all the operations of the nervous system—
cannot be understood without knowledge of synaptic transmission. Therefore,
we’ve devoted several chapters to this topic, mainly focusing on chemical
synapses. In this chapter, we begin by exploring the basic mechanisms
of synaptic transmission. What do different types of synapse look like? How
are neurotransmitters synthesized and stored, and how are they released
in response to an action potential in the axon terminal? How do neurotransmitters
act on the postsynaptic membrane? How do single neurons
integrate the inputs provided by the thousands of synapses that impinge
upon them?
One of the more colorful stories in the history of neuroscience
was contributed by Otto Loewi, who, working in
Austria in the 1920s, showed definitively that synaptic
transmission between nerve and heart is chemically mediated.
The heart is supplied with two types of innervation;
one type speeds the beating of the heart, and the other
slows it. The latter type of innervation is supplied by the
vagus nerve. Loewi isolated a frog heart with the vagal
innervation left intact, stimulated the nerve electrically,
and observed the expected effect, the slowing of the
heartbeat. The critical demonstration that this effect was
chemically mediated came when he took the solution that
bathed this heart, applied it to a second isolated frog
heart, and found that the beating of this one also slowed.
The idea for this experiment had actually come to
Loewi in a dream. Below is his own account:
In the night of Easter Sunday, 1921, I awoke, turned on
the light, and jotted down a few notes on a tiny slip of
paper. Then, I fell asleep again. It occurred to me at
six o’clock in the morning that during the night I had
written down something most important, but I was unable
to decipher the scrawl.That Sunday was the most
desperate day in my whole scientific life. During the
next night, however, I awoke again, at three o’clock, and
I remembered what it was.This time I did not take any
risk; I got up immediately,went to the laboratory, made
the experiment on the frog’s heart, described above,
and at five o’clock the chemical transmission of the
nervous impulse was conclusively proved. . . . Careful
consideration in daytime would undoubtedly have rejected
the kind of experiment I performed, because it
would have seemed most unlikely that if a nervous impulse
released a transmitting agent, it would do so not
just in sufficient quantity to influence the effector organ,
in my case the heart, but indeed in such an excess
that it could partly escape into the fluid which filled the
heart, and could therefore be detected.Yet the whole
nocturnal concept of the experiment was based on
this eventuality, and the result proved to be positive,
contrary to expectation. (Loewi, 1953, pp. 33, 34)
The active compound, which Loewi called vagusstoff,
turned out to be acetylcholine. As we shall see in this
chapter, acetylcholine is also a transmitter at the synapse
between nerve and skeletal muscle. Here, unlike at the
heart, acetylcholine causes excitation and contraction of
the muscle.
We introduced the synapse in Chapter 2. A synapse is the specialized junction
where one part of a neuron contacts and communicates with another
neuron or cell type (such as a muscle or glandular cell). Information tends
to flow in one direction, from a neuron to its target cell. The first neuron
is said to be presynaptic and the target cell is said to be postsynaptic. Let’s take
a closer look at the different types of synapse.
Electrical synapses are relatively simple in structure and function, and they
allow the direct transfer of ionic current from one cell to the next. Electrical
synapses occur at specialized sites called gap junctions. At a gap
junction, the membranes of two cells are separated by only about 3 nm,
and this narrow gap is spanned by clusters of special proteins called connexins.
Six connexins combine to form a channel called a connexon, and
two connexons (one from each cell) combine to form a gap junction channel
(Figure 5.1). The channel allows ions to pass directly from the cytoplasm
of one cell to the cytoplasm of the other. The pore of most gap junction
channels is relatively large. Its diameter is about 1–2 nm, big enough
for all the major cellular ions, and many small organic molecules, to pass
through.
Most gap junctions allow ionic current to pass equally well in both directions;
therefore, unlike the vast majority of chemical synapses, electrical
synapses are bidirectional. Because electrical current (in the form
of ions) can pass through these channels, cells connected by gap junctions
are said to be electrically coupled. Transmission at electrical synapses
is very fast and, if the synapse is large, fail-safe. Thus, an action potential
in the presynaptic neuron can produce, almost instantaneously, an
action potential in the postsynaptic neuron. In invertebrate species, such
as the crayfish, electrical synapses are sometimes found between sensory
and motor neurons in neural pathways mediating escape reflexes. This
mechanism enables an animal to beat a hasty retreat when faced with a
dangerous situation.
Electrical synapses also occur in the vertebrate brain (Box 5.2). Studies
over the past few years have revealed that electrical synapses are common
in every part of the mammalian CNS (Figure 5.2a). When two neurons are
electrically coupled, an action potential in the presynaptic neuron causes a
small amount of ionic current to flow across the gap junction channels into
the other neuron. This current causes a postsynaptic potential (PSP) in
the second neuron (Figure 5.2b). Because most electrical synapses are bidirectional,
note that when the second neuron generates an action potential,
it will in turn induce a PSP in the first neuron. The PSP generated by a single
electrical synapse in the mammalian brain is usually small—about 1 mV
or less at its peak—and may not, by itself, be large enough to trigger an action
potential in the postsynaptic cell. One neuron usually makes electrical
synapses with many other neurons, however, so several PSPs occurring
simultaneously may strongly excite a neuron. This is an example of synaptic
integration, which is discussed later in the chapter.
The precise roles of electrical synapses vary from one brain region to another.
They are often found where normal function requires that the activity
of neighboring neurons be highly synchronized. Gap junctions between
neurons are particularly common during early embryonic stages.
Evidence suggests that during brain development, gap junctions allow
neighboring cells to share both electrical and chemical signals that may help
coordinate their growth and maturation. Gap junctions also interconnect
many non-neural cells, including glia, epithelial cells, smooth and cardiac
muscle cells, liver cells, and some glandular cells.
Most synaptic transmission in the mature human nervous system is chemical,
so we will now focus exclusively on chemical synapses. Before we discuss
the different types of chemical synapse, let’s take a look at some of
their universal characteristics (Figure 5.3).
The presynaptic and postsynaptic membranes at chemical synapses are
separated by a synaptic cleft that is 20–50 nm wide, 10 times the width of
the separation at gap junctions. The cleft is filled with a matrix of fibrous
extracellular protein. One function of this matrix is to make the pre- and
postsynaptic membranes adhere to each other. The presynaptic side of the
synapse, also called the presynaptic element, is usually an axon terminal.
The terminal typically contains dozens of small membrane-enclosed
spheres, each about 50 nm in diameter, called synaptic vesicles (Figure
5.4a). These vesicles store neurotransmitter, the chemical used to communicate
with the postsynaptic neuron. Many axon terminals also contain
larger vesicles, each about 100 nm in diameter, called secretory
granules. Secretory granules contain soluble protein that appears dark in
the electron microscope, so they are sometimes called large, dense-core
vesicles (Figure 5.4b).
Dense accumulations of protein adjacent to and within the membranes
on either side of the synaptic cleft are collectively called membrane differentiations.
On the presynaptic side, proteins jutting into the cytoplasm
of the terminal along the intracellular face of the membrane sometimes
look like a field of tiny pyramids. The pyramids, and the membrane associated
with them, are the actual sites of neurotransmitter release, called active
zones. Synaptic vesicles are clustered in the cytoplasm adjacent to the
active zones (see Figure 5.3).
The protein thickly accumulated in and just under the postsynaptic membrane
is called the postsynaptic density. The postsynaptic density contains
the neurotransmitter receptors, which convert the intercellular chemical
signal (i.e., neurotransmitter) into an intracellular signal (i.e., a change
in membrane potential, or a chemical change) in the postsynaptic cell. As
we shall see, the nature of this postsynaptic response can be quite varied,
depending on the type of protein receptor that is activated by the neurotransmitter.
CNS Synapses. In the CNS, different types of synapse may be distinguished
by which part of the neuron is postsynaptic to the axon terminal.
If the postsynaptic membrane is on a dendrite, the synapse is said to be axodendritic.
If the postsynaptic membrane is on the cell body, the synapse is
said to be axosomatic. In some cases, the postsynaptic membrane is on another
axon, and these synapses are called axoaxonic (Figure 5.5). In certain
specialized neurons, dendrites actually form synapses with one another;
these are called dendrodendritic synapses. The sizes and shapes of CNS
synapses also vary widely (Figure 5.6).
CNS synapses may be further classified into two general categories based
on the appearance of their presynaptic and postsynaptic membrane
differentiations, under the powerful magnification of the electron
microscope. Synapses in which the membrane differentiation on the
postsynaptic side is thicker than that on the presynaptic side are called
asymmetrical synapses, or Gray’s type I synapses; those in which the
membrane differentiations are of similar thickness are called symmetrical
synapses, or Gray’s type II synapses (Figure 5.7). As we shall see later in the
chapter, these structural differences predict functional differences. Gray’s
type I synapses are usually excitatory, while Gray’s type II synapses are
usually inhibitory.
The Neuromuscular Junction. Synaptic junctions also exist outside the
central nervous system. For example, axons of the autonomic nervous system
innervate glands, smooth muscle, and the heart. Chemical synapses
also occur between the axons of motor neurons of the spinal cord and
skeletal muscle. Such a synapse is called a neuromuscular junction, and
it has many of the structural features of chemical synapses in the CNS
(Figure 5.8).
The question of soup versus sparks, not so recent slang
for chemical transmission versus electrical transmission,
goes back to the 1800s.The pharmacologists, who applied
drugs to their experimental preparations, favored soup.
The electrophysiologists, who used electrical stimuli and
studied action potentials favored sparks.They argued that
chemicals were too slow, and besides, if electrical current
was good enough for axons, it should work for synapses
as well. Eventually, intracellular electrodes demonstrated
that synaptic transmission was indeed chemical at the
neuromuscular junction and at synapses on spinal motoneurons,
and people were convinced. The vote was in—
all synaptic transmission was chemical; case closed.
In that context I started postdoctoral work with Harry
Grundfrest at the College of Physicians and Surgeons, in
New York City. Every summer he transported his laboratory
to the Marine Biological Laboratory (MBL), in Woods
Hole, Massachusetts; I accompanied him and have been
going ever since. He proposed that I and Stanley Crain
work on the supramedullary neurons of the pufferfish.
These brain stem neurons are large, even visible to the
naked eye.We soon found that they send their axons to
the skin and are excited by cutaneous inputs. Each cell is
large enough to permit penetration by two microelectrodes,
for current application and voltage recording.Now
and then our electrodes accidentally penetrated adjacent
cells, which led to the discovery that all cells give the
same number of impulses in response to stimuli, and that
an impulse evoked in one cell could spread to other cells;
the cells are mutually excitatory. At first, and for several
wrong reasons, it seemed that the mutual excitation was
chemically mediated; I thought that the spike in the initial
part of the axon was an excitatory postsynaptic potential.
Jack Eccles, subsequently Sir John, was passing through
the lab. He looked at a spike on the oscilloscope screen,
in the sort of live demonstration that rarely works, and
said, no, that potential is the spike from the initial axon
segment; push your electrode deeper and record from
the axons. Damned if he wasn’t right, but there was more.
Recording in an axon, I found the soma of a different
neuron that was electrically coupled to it for hyperpolarization
as well as depolarization. This was impossible to
ignore, even for the unprepared mind: there were electrical
synapses between the two cells. Several important biophysical
properties of electrical transmission were exemplified
by these giant neurons. Some years later Yasuko
Nakajima, using electron microscopy (EM) and working
with George Pappas, found gap junctions between axons
of the supramedullary neurons.
A couple of years later I was working on fish electric
organs in Harry’s lab, and he pointed me to the question
of neural control. Emilio Aljure and I looked at the spinal
cord of a mormyrid electric fish. The neurons fire highly
synchronously, and the synchrony is mediated by electrical
coupling between the cells. Mutually excitatory chemical
synapses would not be adequate to synchronize their firing
because of their characteristic delay. Nakajima and Pappas
showed that the dendrites were connected by gap junctions
(although they did not yet have that name).We suggested
in a brief Science paper that EM identification of
electrical synapses might be useful in examining dendritic
regions.We were pleased when 10 years later John Sloper
and Thomas Powell, using EM, found dendrodendritic gap
junctions in primate neocortex.
The early work on electrical synapses was done almost
entirely in fishes and invertebrates; many mammalian physiologists
regarded electrical transmission as primitive compared
to chemical transmission and unsuited for the subtle
neural processing of the mammalian brain. (Ironically,
current work suggests that vertebrate electrical synapses
actually evolved later than chemically mediated transmission.)
During the 1980s, a few examples of electrical coupling
of neurons became known in mammals, such as inferior
olive cells and retinal horizontal cells.Now technical
advances have led to a burgeoning of knowledge about
electrical synapses in mammals.
Electrical synapses exist where they are useful.Although
their numbers are small compared to chemical synapses,
any description of how the nervous system works requires
their inclusion. In general in mammals, the speed of
electrical transmission is not the only explanation for its
being there.A more likely selective advantage is its ability
to synchronize neural activity by reciprocal action and
transmission of sub-threshold voltages.
Ramon y Cajal was right when he concluded that the
nervous system is made of individual, discontinuous
neurons. But he also wrote that the neuron doctrine
could withstand some exceptions. The direct connection
between cell interiors provided by gap junctions could be
viewed as an exception.
Neuromuscular synaptic transmission is fast and reliable. An action potential
in the motor axon always causes an action potential in the muscle
cell it innervates. This reliability is accounted for, in part, by structural
specializations of the neuromuscular junction. Its most important specialization
is its size—it is one of the largest synapses in the body. The presynaptic
terminal also contains a large number of active zones. In addition, the
post-synaptic membrane, also called the motor end-plate, contains a series
of shallow folds. The presynaptic active zones are precisely aligned with
these junctional folds, and the postsynaptic membrane of the folds is packed
with neurotransmitter receptors. This structure ensures that many neurotransmitter
molecules are focally released onto a large surface of chemically
sensitive membrane.
Because neuromuscular junctions are more accessible to researchers than
CNS synapses, much of what we know about the mechanisms of synaptic
transmission was first established here. Neuromuscular junctions are also
of considerable clinical significance; diseases, drugs, and poisons that interfere
with this chemical synapse have direct effects on vital bodily functions.
Consider the basic requirements of chemical synaptic transmission. There
must be a mechanism for synthesizing neurotransmitter and packing it into
the synaptic vesicles, a mechanism for causing vesicles to spill their contents
into the synaptic cleft in response to a presynaptic action potential, a
mechanism for producing an electrical or biochemical response to neurotransmitter
in the postsynaptic neuron, and a mechanism for removing
neurotransmitter from the synaptic cleft. And, to be useful for sensation,
perception, and the control of movement, all these things must occur very
rapidly. No wonder physiologists initially were skeptical about the existence
of chemical synapses in the brain!
Fortunately, thanks to several decades of research on the topic, we now
understand how many of these aspects of synaptic transmission are so
efficiently carried out. Here we present a general survey of the basic principles.
In Chapter 6, we will take a more detailed look at the individual
neurotransmitters and their modes of postsynaptic action.
Since the discovery of chemical synaptic transmission, researchers have been
identifying neurotransmitters in the brain. Our current understanding is that
most neurotransmitters fall into one of three chemical categories: (1) amino
acids, (2) amines, and (3) peptides (Table 5.1). Some representatives of these
categories are shown in Figure 5.9. The amino acid and amine neurotransmitters
are all small organic molecules containing at least one nitrogen atom,
and they are stored in and released from synaptic vesicles. Peptide neurotransmitters
are large molecules stored in and released from secretory
granules. As mentioned above, secretory granules and synaptic vesicles are
frequently observed in the same axon terminals. Consistent with this observation,
peptides often exist in the same axon terminals that contain amine
or amino acid neurotransmitters. And, as we’ll discuss in a moment, these
different neurotransmitters are released under different conditions.
Different neurons in the brain release different neurotransmitters. Fast
synaptic transmission at most CNS synapses is mediated by the amino acids
glutamate (Glu), gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), and glycine
(Gly). The amine acetylcholine (ACh) mediates fast synaptic transmission
at all neuromuscular junctions. Slower forms of synaptic transmission
in the CNS and in the periphery are mediated by transmitters from all three
chemical categories.
Chemical synaptic transmission requires that neurotransmitters be synthesized
and ready for release. Different neurotransmitters are synthesized in different
ways. For example, glutamate and glycine are among the 20 amino
acids that are the building blocks of protein (see Figure 3.4b); consequently,
they are abundant in all cells of the body, including neurons. In contrast,
GABA and the amines are made only by the neurons that release them. These
neurons contain specific enzymes that synthesize the neurotransmitters from
various metabolic precursors. The synthesizing enzymes for both amino acid
and amine neurotransmitters are transported to the axon terminal, where
they locally and rapidly direct transmitter synthesis.
Once synthesized in the cytosol of the axon terminal, the amino acid and
amine neurotransmitters must be taken up by the synaptic vesicles. Concentrating
these neurotransmitters inside the vesicle is the job of transporters,
special proteins embedded in the vesicle membrane.
Quite different mechanisms are used to synthesize and store peptides in
secretory granules. As we learned in Chapters 2 and 3, peptides are formed
when amino acids are strung together by the ribosomes of the cell body.
In the case of peptide neurotransmitters, this occurs in the rough ER.
Generally, a long peptide synthesized in the rough ER is split in the Golgi
apparatus, and one of the smaller peptide fragments is the active neurotransmitter.
Secretory granules containing the peptide neurotransmitter
bud off from the Golgi apparatus and are carried to the axon terminal by
axoplasmic transport. Figure 5.10 compares the synthesis and storage of
amine and amino acid neurotransmitters with that of peptide neurotransmitters.
Neurotransmitter release is triggered by the arrival of an action potential in
the axon terminal. The depolarization of the terminal membrane causes
voltage-gated calcium channels in the active zones to open. These
membrane channels are very similar to the sodium channels we discussed
in Chapter 4, except they are permeable to Ca2 ions instead of Na ions.
There is a large inward driving force on Ca2. Remember that the internal
calcium ion concentration—[Ca2]i—at rest is very low, only 0.0002 mM;
therefore, Ca2 will flood the cytoplasm of the axon terminal as long as the
calcium channels are open. The resulting elevation in [Ca2]i is the signal
that causes neurotransmitter to be released from synaptic vesicles.
The vesicles release their contents by a process called exocytosis. The
membrane of the synaptic vesicle fuses to the presynaptic membrane at
the active zone, allowing the contents of the vesicle to spill out into the
synaptic cleft (Figure 5.11). Studies of a giant synapse in the squid nervous
system showed that exocytosis can occur very rapidly—within 0.2 msec of
the Ca2 influx into the terminal. Synapses in mammals, which generally
operate at higher temperatures, are even faster. Exocytosis is quick because
Ca2 enters at the active zone, precisely where synaptic vesicles are ready
and waiting to release their contents. In this local “microdomain” around
the active zone, calcium can achieve very high concentrations (greater
than 0.1 mM).
The precise mechanism by which [Ca2]i stimulates exocytosis is poorly
understood, but it is currently under intensive investigation. The speed of
neurotransmitter release suggests that the vesicles involved are those already
“docked” at the active zones. Docking is believed to involve interactions
between proteins in the synaptic vesicle membrane and the active
zone (Box 5.3). In the presence of high [Ca2]i, these proteins alter their
conformation so that the lipid bilayers of the vesicle and presynaptic membranes
fuse, forming a pore that allows the neurotransmitter to escape into
the cleft. The mouth of this exocytotic fusion pore continues to expand
until the membrane of the vesicle is fully incorporated into the presynaptic
membrane (Figure 5.12). The vesicle membrane is later recovered by the
process of endocytosis, and the recycled vesicle is refilled with neurotransmitter
(see Figure 5.11). During periods of prolonged stimulation,
vesicles are mobilized from a “reserve pool” that is bound to the cytoskeleton
of the axon terminal. The release of these vesicles from the cytoskeleton,
and their docking to the active zone, is also triggered by elevations of
[Ca2]i.
Secretory granules also release peptide neurotransmitters by exocytosis,
in a calcium-dependent fashion, but typically not at the active zones. Because
the sites of granule exocytosis occur at a distance from the sites of
Ca2 entry, peptide neurotransmitters are usually not released in response
to every action potential invading the terminal. Instead, the release of peptides
generally requires high-frequency trains of action potentials, so that
the [Ca2]i throughout the terminal can build to the level required to trigger
release away from the active zones. Unlike the fast release of amino
acid and amine neurotransmitters, the release of peptides is a leisurely
process, taking 50 msec or more.
Neurotransmitters released into the synaptic cleft affect the postsynaptic
neuron by binding to specific receptor proteins that are embedded in the
postsynaptic density. The binding of neurotransmitter to the receptor is like
inserting a key in a lock; this causes conformational changes in the protein,
and the protein can then function differently. Although there are well over
100 different neurotransmitter receptors, they can be classified into two
types: transmitter-gated ion channels and G-protein-coupled receptors.
Transmitter-Gated Ion Channels. Receptors known as transmittergated
ion channels are membrane-spanning proteins consisting of four or
five subunits that come together to form a pore between them (Figure 5.13).
In the absence of neurotransmitter, the pore is usually closed. When neurotransmitter
binds to specific sites on the extracellular region of the channel,
it induces a conformational change—just a slight twist of the subunits— which within microseconds causes the pore to open. The functional consequence
of this depends on which ions can pass through the pore.
Transmitter-gated channels generally do not show the same degree of ion
selectivity as do voltage-gated channels. For example, the ACh-gated ion
channels at the neuromuscular junction are permeable to both Na and K
ions. Nonetheless, as a rule, if the open channels are permeable to Na, the
net effect will be to depolarize the postsynaptic cell from the resting membrane
potential (Box 5.4). Because it tends to bring the membrane potential
toward threshold for generating action potentials, this effect is said to
be excitatory. A transient postsynaptic membrane depolarization caused by
the presynaptic release of neurotransmitter is called an excitatory postsynaptic
potential (EPSP) (Figure 5.14). Synaptic activation of AChgated
and glutamate-gated ion channels causes EPSPs.
If the transmitter-gated channels are permeable to Cl, the net effect
will be to hyperpolarize the postsynaptic cell from the resting membrane
potential (because the chloride equilibrium potential is negative; see Chapter
3). Because it tends to bring the membrane potential away from threshold
for generating action potentials, this effect is said to be inhibitory. A
transient hyperpolarization of the postsynaptic membrane potential caused
by the presynaptic release of neurotransmitter is called an inhibitory
postsynaptic potential (IPSP) (Figure 5.15). Synaptic activation of
glycine-gated or GABA-gated ion channels cause an IPSP. We’ll discuss
EPSPs and IPSPs in more detail when we explore the principles of synaptic
integration shortly.
Yeasts are single-celled organisms valued for their ability to make dough
rise and grape juice ferment. Remarkably, the humble yeasts have some
close similarities to the chemical synapses in our brain. Recent research
has shown that the proteins controlling secretion in both yeast cells and
synapses are only minor variations of each other. Apparently, these molecules
are so generally useful that they have been conserved across more
than a billion years of evolution, and they are found in all eukaryotic cells.
The trick to fast synaptic function is to deliver neurotransmitter-filled
vesicles to just the right place—the presynaptic membrane, and then
cause them to fuse at just the right time—when an action potential delivers
a pulse of high Ca2concentration to the cytosol. This process of
exocytosis is a special case of a more general cellular problem, membrane
trafficking. Cells have many types of membranes, including those enclosing
the whole cell, the nucleus, endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus, and
various types of vesicles.To avoid intracellular chaos, each of these membranes
needs to be moved and delivered to specific locations within the
cell. After delivery, one type of membrane often has to fuse with another
type. A common molecular machinery has evolved for the delivery and
fusion of all these membranes, and small variations in these molecules
determine how and when membrane trafficking takes place.
The specific binding and fusion of membranes seem to depend on the
SNARE family of proteins, which were first found in yeast cells. SNARE is
an acronym too convoluted to define here, but the name perfectly defines
the function of these proteins—SNAREs allow one membrane to snare
another. Each SNARE peptide has a lipid-loving end that embeds itself
within the membrane and a longer tail that projects into the cytosol.Vesicles
have “v-SNAREs,” and the outer membrane has “t-SNAREs” (for “target”
membrane). The cytosolic ends of these two complementary types
of SNAREs can bind tightly to one another, allowing a vesicle to “dock”
very close to a presynaptic membrane and nowhere else (Figure A).
Although SNARE-to-SNARE complexes form the main connection between
vesicle membrane and target membrane, a large and bewildering
array of other proteins stick to the “SNAREpin.” We still don’t understand
the functions of most of them, but synaptotagmin, a vesicle protein, may
be the critical Ca2sensor that rapidly triggers vesicle fusion and thus
transmitter release. On the presynaptic membrane side, calcium channels
may form part of the docking complex. By placing the calcium channels
very close to the docked vesicles, inflowing Ca2can trigger transmitter
release with astonishing speed—within about 60 μsec in a mammalian
synapse at body temperature.
We have a long way to go before we understand all the molecules involved
in synaptic transmission. In the meantime, we can count on yeasts
to provide delightful brain food (and drink) for thought.
G-Protein-Coupled Receptors. Fast chemical synaptic transmission is
mediated by amino acid and amine neurotransmitters acting on transmitter-
gated ion channels. However, all three types of neurotransmitter, acting
on G-protein-coupled receptors, can also have slower, longer-lasting,
and much more diverse postsynaptic actions. This type of transmitter action
involves three steps:
1) Neurotransmitter molecules bind to receptor proteins embedded in the
postsynaptic membrane.
2) The receptor proteins activate small proteins, called G-proteins, that are
free to move along the intracellular face of the postsynaptic membrane.
3) The activated G-proteins activate “effector” proteins.
Effector proteins can be G-protein-gated ion channels in the membrane
(Figure 5.16a), or they can be enzymes that synthesize molecules called
second messengers that diffuse away in the cytosol (Figure 5.16b). Second
messengers can activate additional enzymes in the cytosol that can
regulate ion channel function and alter cellular metabolism. Because Gprotein-
coupled receptors can trigger widespread metabolic effects, they are
often referred to as metabotropic receptors.
We’ll discuss the different neurotransmitters, their receptors, and their
effectors in more detail in Chapter 6. However, you should be aware that
the same neurotransmitter can have different postsynaptic actions, depending
on what receptors it binds to. An example is the effect of ACh on the
heart and on skeletal muscles. ACh slows the rhythmic contractions of the
heart by causing a slow hyperpolarization of the cardiac muscle cells. In
contrast, in skeletal muscle, ACh induces contraction by causing a rapid
depolarization of the muscle fibers. These different actions are explained by
different receptors. In the heart, a metabotropic ACh receptor is coupled by
a G-protein to a potassium channel. The opening of the potassium channel
hyperpolarizes the cardiac muscle fibers. In skeletal muscle, the receptor is
a transmitter-gated ion channel, specifically an ACh-gated ion channel,
permeable to Na+. The opening of this channel depolarizes the muscle
fibers.
Autoreceptors. Besides being a part of the postsynaptic density, neurotransmitter
receptors are also commonly found in the membrane of the
presynaptic axon terminal. Presynaptic receptors that are sensitive to the
neurotransmitter released by the presynaptic terminal are called autoreceptors.
Typically, autoreceptors are G-protein-coupled receptors that stimulate
second messenger formation. The consequences of activating these receptors
vary, but a common effect is inhibition of neurotransmitter release
and, in some cases, neurotransmitter synthesis. This allows a presynaptic
terminal to regulate itself. Autoreceptors appear to function as a sort of
safety valve to reduce release when the concentration of neurotransmitter
in the synaptic cleft gets too high.
Once the released neurotransmitter has interacted with postsynaptic receptors,
it must be cleared from the synaptic cleft to allow another round
of synaptic transmission. One way this happens is by simple diffusion of the
transmitter molecules away from the synapse. For most of the amino acid
and amine neurotransmitters, however, diffusion is aided by their reuptake
into the presynaptic axon terminal. Reuptake occurs by the action of specific
neurotransmitter transporter proteins located in the presynaptic membrane.
Once inside the cytosol of the terminal, the transmitters may be enzymatically
destroyed, or they may be reloaded into synaptic vesicles.
Neurotransmitter transporters also exist in the membranes of glia surrounding
the synapse, which assist in the removal of neurotransmitter from
the cleft.
Another way neurotransmitter action can be terminated is by enzymatic
destruction in the synaptic cleft itself. This is how ACh is removed at the
neuromuscular junction, for example. The enzyme acetylcholinesterase (AChE) is deposited in the cleft by the muscle cells. AChE cleaves the ACh
molecule, rendering it inactive at the ACh receptors.
The importance of transmitter removal from the cleft should not be
underestimated. At the neuromuscular junction, for example, uninterrupted
exposure to high concentrations of ACh after several seconds leads
to a process called desensitization, in which, despite the continued presence
of ACh, the transmitter-gated channels close. This desensitized state can
persist for many seconds even after the neurotransmitter is removed. The
rapid destruction of ACh by AChE normally prevents desensitization from
occurring. However, if the AChE is inhibited, as it is by various nerve gases
used as chemical weapons, the ACh receptors will become desensitized and
neuromuscular transmission will fail.
In Chapter 4, we saw that when the membrane voltagegated
sodium channels open during an action potential,
Na enters the cell, causing the membrane potential to
rapidly depolarize until it approaches the sodium equilibrium
potential, ENa, about 40 mV. Unlike the voltage-gated
channels, however, many transmitter-gated ion channels
are not permeable to a single type of ion. For example,
the ACh-gated ion channel at the neuromuscular junction
is permeable to both Na and to K. Let’s explore the
functional consequence of activating these channels.
In Chapter 3, we learned that the membrane potential,
Vm, can be calculated using the Goldman equation, which
takes into account the relative permeability of the membrane
to different ions (see Box 3.3). If the membrane
were equally permeable to Na and K, as it would be if
the ACh-gated channels were open, then Vm would have
a value between ENa and EK, around 0 mV. Therefore,
ionic current would flow through the channels in a direction
that brings the membrane potential toward 0 mV. If
the membrane potential were 0 mV before ACh was applied,
as is usually the case, the direction of net current
flow through the ACh-gated ion channels would be inward,
causing a depolarization. However, if the membrane
potential were 0 mV before ACh was applied, the direction
of net current flow through the ACh-gated ion
channels would be outward, causing the membrane potential
to become less positive.
Ionic current flow at different membrane voltages can
be graphed, as shown in Figure A. Such a graph is called
an I-V plot (I: current; V: voltage). The critical value of
membrane potential at which the direction of current
flow reverses is called the reversal potential. In this case,
the reversal potential would be 0 mV. The experimental
determination of a reversal potential, therefore, helps tell
us which types of ions the membrane is permeable to.
If, by changing the relative permeability of the membrane
to different ions, a neurotransmitter causes Vm to
move toward a value that is more positive than the action
potential threshold, the neurotransmitter action would
be termed excitatory. As a rule, neurotransmitters that
open a channel permeable to Na are excitatory. If a
neurotransmitter causes Vm to take on a value that is
more negative than the action potential threshold, the
neurotransmitter action would be termed inhibitory.
Neurotransmitters that open a channel permeable to Cl
tend to be inhibitory, as are neurotransmitters that open
a channel permeable only to K.
Each of the steps of synaptic transmission we have discussed so far—neurotransmitter
synthesis, loading into synaptic vesicles, exocytosis, binding and
activation of receptors, reuptake, and degradation—is chemical, and therefore
can be affected by specific drugs and toxins (Box 5.5). The study of the
effects of drugs on nervous system tissue is called neuropharmacology.
What do the bacteria Clostridium botulinum, black widow
spiders, cobras, and humans have in common? They all
produce toxins that attack the chemical synaptic transmission
that occurs at the neuromuscular junction. Botulism
is caused by several kinds of botulinum neurotoxins
that are produced by the growth of C. botulinum in improperly
canned foods. (The name comes from the Latin
word for “sausage” because of the early association of the
disease with poorly preserved meat.) Botulinum toxins
are very potent blockers of neuromuscular transmission;
it has been estimated that as few as 10 molecules of the
toxins are enough to inhibit a cholinergic synapse. Botulinum
toxins are extraordinarily specific enzymes that destroy
certain of the SNARE proteins in the presynaptic
terminals, which are critical for transmitter release (see
Box 5.3). Ironically, this specific action of the toxins made
them important tools in the early research on SNAREs.
Although its mechanism of action is different, black
widow spider venom also exerts deadly effects by affecting
transmitter release (Figure A). The venom first increases,
and then eliminates, ACh release at the neuromuscular
junction. Electron microscopic examination of
synapses poisoned with black widow spider venom reveals
that the axon terminals are swollen and the synaptic
vesicles are missing. The action of the venom, a protein
molecule, is not entirely understood. Venom binds
with proteins on the outside of the presynaptic membrane,
perhaps forming a membrane pore that depolarizes
the terminal and allows Ca2 to enter and trigger rapid
and total depletion of transmitter. In some cases, the
venom can induce transmitter release even without the
need for Ca2.
The bite of the Taiwanese cobra also results in the
blockade of neuromuscular transmission in its victim, but
by yet another mechanism. One of the active compounds
in the snake’s venom, called -bungarotoxin, is a peptide
molecule that binds so tightly to the postsynaptic nicotinic
ACh receptors that it takes days to be removed.
Often, there is not time for its removal, however, because
cobra toxin prevents the activation of nicotinic receptors
by ACh, thereby paralyzing the respiratory muscles of its
victims.
We humans have synthesized a large number of chemicals
that poison synaptic transmission at the neuromuscular
junction. Originally motivated by the search for
chemical warfare agents, this effort led to the development
of a new class of compounds called organophosphates.
These are irreversible inhibitors of AChE, and by
preventing the degradation of ACh, they probably kill their
victims by causing a desensitization of ACh receptors.
The organophosphates used today as insecticides, like
parathion, are toxic to humans only in high doses.
Above, we mentioned that nerve gases can interfere with synaptic transmission
at the neuromuscular junction by inhibiting the enzyme AChE.
This interference represents one class of drug action, which is to inhibit the
normal function of specific proteins involved in synaptic transmission; such
drugs are called inhibitors. Inhibitors of neurotransmitter receptors, called
receptor antagonists, bind to the receptors and block (antagonize) the
normal action of the transmitter. An example of a receptor antagonist is curare,
an arrow-tip poison traditionally used by South American Indians to paralyze
their prey. Curare binds tightly to the ACh receptors on skeletal muscle
cells and blocks the actions of ACh, thereby preventing muscle contraction.
Other drugs bind to receptors, but instead of inhibiting them, they mimic
the actions of the naturally occurring neurotransmitter. These drugs are
called receptor agonists. An example of a receptor agonist is nicotine, derived
from the tobacco plant. Nicotine binds to, and activates, the ACh receptors
in skeletal muscle. In fact, the ACh-gated ion channels in muscle
are also called nicotinic ACh receptors, to distinguish them from other
types of ACh receptors, such as those in the heart, that are not activated
by nicotine. There are also nicotinic ACh receptors in the CNS, and these
are involved in the addictive effects of tobaccco use.
The immense chemical complexity of synaptic transmission makes it especially
susceptible to the medical corollary of Murphy’s law, which states
that if a physiological process can go wrong, it will go wrong. When chemical
synaptic transmission goes wrong, the nervous system malfunctions.
Defective neurotransmission is believed to be the root cause of a large number
of neurological and psychiatric disorders. The good news is that, thanks
to our growing knowledge of the neuropharmacology of synaptic transmission,
clinicians have new and increasingly effective therapeutic drugs for
treating these disorders. We’ll discuss the synaptic basis of some psychiatric
disorders, and their neuropharmacological treatment, in Chapter 22.
Most CNS neurons receive thousands of synaptic inputs that activate different
combinations of transmitter-gated ion channels and G-protein-coupled
receptors. The postsynaptic neuron integrates all these complex ionic
and chemical signals and gives rise to a simple form of output: action potentials.
The transformation of many synaptic inputs to a single neuronal
output constitutes a neural computation. The brain performs billions of
neural computations every second we are alive. As a first step toward understanding
how neural computations are performed, let’s explore some
basic principles of synaptic integration. Synaptic integration is the process
by which multiple synaptic potentials combine within one postsynaptic
neuron.
The most elementary postsynaptic response is the opening of a single
transmitter-gated channel (Figure 5.17). Inward current through these
channels depolarizes the postsynaptic membrane, causing the EPSP. The
postsynaptic membrane of one synapse may have from a few tens to several
thousands of transmitter-gated channels; how many of these are activated
during synaptic transmission depends mainly on how much neurotransmitter
is released.
Quantal Analysis of EPSPs. The elementary unit of neurotransmitter release
is the contents of a single synaptic vesicle. Vesicles each contain about
the same number of transmitter molecules (several thousand); the total
amount of transmitter released is some multiple of this number. Consequently,
the amplitude of the postsynaptic EPSP is some multiple of the response
to the contents of a single vesicle. Stated another way, postsynaptic
EPSPs at a given synapse are quantized; they are multiples of an indivisible
unit, the quantum, that reflects the number of transmitter molecules in a
single synaptic vesicle and the number of postsynaptic receptors available
at the synapse.
At many synapses, exocytosis of vesicles occurs at some very low rate in
the absence of presynaptic stimulation. The size of the postsynaptic response
to this spontaneously released neurotransmitter can be measured
electrophysiologically. This tiny response is a miniature postsynaptic
potential, often called simply a “mini.” Each mini is generated by the
transmitter contents of one vesicle. The amplitude of the postsynaptic EPSP
evoked by a presynaptic action potential, then, is simply an integer multiple
(i.e., 1, 2, 3, etc.) of the mini amplitude.
Quantal analysis, a method of comparing the amplitudes of miniature
and evoked postsynaptic potentials, can be used to determine how many
vesicles release neurotransmitter during normal synaptic transmission.
Quantal analysis of transmission at the neuromuscular junction reveals that
a single action potential in the presynaptic terminal triggers the exocytosis
of about 200 synaptic vesicles, causing an EPSP of 40 mV or more. At many
CNS synapses, in striking contrast, the contents of only a single vesicle are
released in response to a presynaptic action potential, causing an EPSP of
only a few tenths of a millivolt.
EPSP Summation. The difference between excitatory transmission at
neuromuscular junctions and CNS synapses is not surprising. The neuromuscular
junction has evolved to be fail-safe; it needs to work every time,
and the best way to ensure this is to generate an EPSP of a huge size. On
the other hand, if every CNS synapse were, by itself, capable of triggering
an action potential in its postsynaptic cell (as the neuromuscular junction
can), then a neuron would be little more than a simple relay station. Instead,
most neurons perform more sophisticated computations, requiring
that many EPSPs add together to produce a significant postsynaptic depolarization.
This is what is meant by integration of EPSPs.
EPSP summation represents the simplest form of synaptic integration
in the CNS. There are two types of summation: spatial and temporal. Spatial
summation is the adding together of EPSPs generated simultaneously at
many different synapses on a dendrite. Temporal summation is the
adding together of EPSPs generated at the same synapse if they occur in
rapid succession, within about 1–15 msec of one another (Figure 5.18).
Even with the summation of several EPSPs out on a dendrite, the depolarization
still may not be enough to cause a neuron to fire an action potential.
The current entering at the sites of synaptic contact must spread
down the dendrite, through the soma, and cause the membrane of the
spike-initiation zone to be depolarized beyond threshold, before an action
potential can be generated. The effectiveness of an excitatory synapse in
triggering an action potential, therefore, depends on how far the synapse
is from the spike-initiation zone and on the properties of the dendritic
membrane.
Dendritic Cable Properties. To simplify the analysis of how dendritic
properties contribute to synaptic integration, let’s assume that dendrites
function as cylindrical cables that are electrically passive; that is, lacking
voltage-gated ion channels (in contrast, of course, with axons). Using an
analogy introduced in Chapter 4, imagine that the influx of positive charge
at a synapse is like turning on the water that will flow down a leaky garden
hose (the dendrite). There are two paths the water can take: One is
down the inside of the hose; the other is through the leaks. By the same
token, there are two paths that synaptic current can take: One is down the
inside of the dendrite; the other is across the dendritic membrane. At some
distance from the site of current influx, the EPSP amplitude may approach
zero because of the dissipation of the current across the membrane.
The decrease in depolarization as a function of distance along a dendritic
cable is plotted in Figure 5.19. In order to simplify the mathematics, in this
example we assume the dendrite is infinitely long, unbranched, and uniform
in diameter. Notice that the amount of depolarization falls off exponentially
with increasing distance. Depolarization of the membrane at a
given distance (Vx) can be described by the equation Vx  Vo/ex/	, where
Vo is depolarization at the origin (just under the synapse), e ( 2.718...) is
the base of natural logarithms, x is the distance from the synapse, and l is
a constant that depends on the properties of the dendrite. Notice that when
x  	, then Vx  Vo/e. Put another way, V	  0.37 (Vo). This distance 	,
where the depolarization is 37% of that at the origin, is called the dendritic
length constant. (Remember that this analysis is an oversimplification.
Real dendrites have finite lengths, branches, and tend to taper, all of which
also affect the spread of current, and thus the effectiveness of synaptic
potentials.)
The length constant is an index of how far depolarization can spread
down a dendrite or axon. The longer the length constant, the more likely
it is that EPSPs generated at distant synapses will depolarize the membrane
at the axon hillock. The value of 	 in our idealized, electrically passive dendrite
depends on two factors: (1) the resistance to current flowing longitudinally
down the dendrite, called the internal resistance (ri); and (2) the
resistance to current flowing across the membrane, called the membrane
resistance (rm). Most current will take the path of least resistance; therefore,
the value of 	 will increase as membrane resistance increases because
more depolarizing current will flow down the inside of the dendrite. The
value of 	 will decrease as internal resistance increases because more current
will flow across the membrane. Just as water will flow farther down
a wide hose with few leaks, synaptic current will flow farther down a wide
dendrite (low ri) with few open membrane channels (high rm).
The internal resistance depends only on the diameter of the dendrite and
the electrical properties of the cytoplasm; consequently, it is relatively constant
in a mature neuron. The membrane resistance, in contrast, depends on
the number of open ion channels, which changes from moment to moment
depending on what other synapses are active. The dendritic length constant,
therefore, is not constant at all! As we will see in a moment, fluctuations
in the value of l are an important factor in synaptic integration.
Excitable Dendrites. Our analysis of dendritic cable properties made another
important assumption: The dendrite’s membrane is electrically passive,
which means it lacks voltage-gated channels. Some dendrites in the
brain have nearly passive and inexcitable membranes, and thus follow the
simple cable equations. The dendrites of spinal motor neurons, for example,
are very close to passive. However, many other neuronal dendrites are
decidedly not passive. A variety of neurons have dendrites with significant
numbers of voltage-gated sodium, calcium, and potassium channels. Dendrites
rarely have enough ion channels to generate fully propagating action
potentials, as in axons. But the voltage-gated channels in dendrites can act
as important amplifiers of small postsynaptic potentials generated far out
on dendrites. EPSPs that would diminish to near nothingness in a long, passive
dendrite may nevertheless be large enough to trigger the opening of
voltage-gated sodium channels, which in turn would add current to boost
the synaptic signal along toward the soma.
Paradoxically, in some cells dendritic sodium channels may also serve to
carry electrical signals in the other direction—from the soma outward along
dendrites. This may be a mechanism by which synapses on dendrites are
informed that a spike occurred in the soma, and it has relevance for hypotheses
about the cellular mechanisms of learning that will be discussed
in Chapter 25.
So far, we’ve seen that whether or not an EPSP contributes to the action
potential output of a neuron depends on several factors, including the
number of coactive excitatory synapses, the distance the synapse is from
the spike-initiation zone, and the properties of the dendritic membrane. Of
course, not all synapses in the brain are excitatory. The action of some
synapses is to take the membrane potential away from action potential
threshold; these are called inhibitory synapses. Inhibitory synapses exert a
powerful control over a neuron’s output (Box 5.6).
IPSPs and Shunting Inhibition. The postsynaptic receptors under most
inhibitory synapses are very similar to those under excitatory synapses;
they’re transmitter-gated ion channels. The only important differences are
that they bind different neurotransmitters (either GABA or glycine) and
that they allow different ions to pass through their channels. The transmitter-
gated channels of most inhibitory synapses are permeable to only
one natural ion, Cl. Opening of the chloride channel allows Cl ions to
cross the membrane in a direction that brings the membrane potential toward
the chloride equilibrium potential, ECl, about 65 mV. If the membrane
potential were less negative than 65 mV when the transmitter was
released, activation of these channels would cause a hyperpolarizing IPSP.
Notice that if the resting membrane potential were already 65 mV, no
IPSP would be visible after chloride channel activation because the value of
the membrane potential would already equal ECl (i.e., the reversal potential
for that synapse; see Box 5.4). If there is no visible IPSP, is the neuron
really inhibited? The answer is yes. Consider the situation illustrated in Figure
5.20, with an excitatory synapse on a distal segment of dendrite and
an inhibitory synapse on a proximal segment of dendrite, near the soma.
Activation of the excitatory synapse leads to the influx of positive charge
into the dendrite. This current depolarizes the membrane as it flows toward
the soma. At the site of the active inhibitory synapse, however, the membrane
potential is approximately equal to ECl, 65 mV. Positive current
therefore flows outward across the membrane at this site to bring Vm to
65 mV. This synapse acts as an electrical shunt, preventing the current
from flowing through the soma to the axon hillock. This type of inhibition
is called shunting inhibition. The actual physical basis of shunting inhibition
is the inward movement of negatively charged chloride ions, which is formally
equivalent to outward positive current flow. Shunting inhibition is like
cutting a big hole in the leaky garden hose—all the water flows down this
path of least resistance, out of the hose, before it gets to the nozzle where
it can “activate” the flowers in your garden.
A flash of lightning . . . a thunderclap . . . a tap on the shoulder
when you think you’re alone! If you are not expecting
them, any of these stimuli can make you jump, grimace,
hunch your shoulders, and breathe faster.We all know the
brief but dramatic nature of the startle response.
Luckily, when lightning strikes twice or a friend taps our
shoulder again, we tend to be much less startled the second
time. We quickly habituate, and relax. However, for
an unfortunate minority of mice, cows, dogs, horses, and
people, life is a succession of exaggerated startle responses.
Even normally benign stimuli, such as hands clapping or a
touch to the nose, may trigger an uncontrollable stiffening
of the body, an involuntary shout, flexion of the arms
and legs, and a fall to the ground.Worse yet, these overdone
responses don’t adapt when the stimuli are repeated.
The clinical term for startle disease is hyperekplexia, and
the first recorded cases were members of a community
of French-Canadian lumberjacks in 1878. Hyperekplexia is
an inherited condition, seen worldwide, and its sufferers
are known by colorful local names: the “Jumping Frenchmen
of Maine” (Quebec), “myriachit” (Siberia), “latah”
(Malaysia), and “Ragin’ Cajuns” (Louisiana).
We now know the molecular basis for two general
types of startle diseases. Remarkably, both involve defects
of inhibitory glycine receptors.The first type, identified in
humans and in a mutant mouse called spasmodic, is caused
by a mutation of a gene for the glycine receptor. The
change is the smallest one possible—the abnormal receptors
have only one amino acid (out of more than 400)
coded wrong—but the result is a chloride channel that
opens less frequently when exposed to the neurotransmitter
glycine. The second type of startle disease is seen
in the mutant mouse spastic and in a strain of cattle. In
these animals, normal glycine receptors are expressed, but
in fewer than normal numbers. The two forms of startle
disease thus take different routes to the same unfortunate
end: The transmitter glycine is less effective at inhibiting
neurons in the spinal cord and brain stem.
Most neural circuits depend on a delicate balance of
synaptic excitation and inhibition for normal functioning.
If excitation is increased or inhibition reduced, then a turbulent
and hyperexcitable state may result. An impairment
of glycine function yields exaggerated startles; reduced
GABA function can lead to the seizures of epilepsy (as
discussed in Chapter 14). How can such diseases be
treated? There is often a clear and simple logic. Drugs that
enhance inhibition can be very helpful.
The genetic mutations of the glycine system resemble
strychnine poisoning. Strychnine is a powerful plant toxin,
first isolated in the early nineteenth century. It has traditionally
been used by farmers to eradicate pesky rodents
and by murderers. Strychnine has a simple mechanism of
action: It is an antagonist of glycine at its receptor. Mild
strychnine poisoning enhances startle and other reflexes,
and resembles hyperekplexia. High doses nearly eliminate
glycine-mediated inhibition in circuits of the spinal cord and
brain stem. This leads to uncontrollable seizures and
unchecked muscular contractions, spasm and paralysis of
the respiratory muscles, and ultimately death from asphyxiation.
It is a painful, agonizing way to die; because glycine is
not a transmitter in the higher centers of the brain, strychnine
itself does not impair cognitive or sensory functions.
Thus, you can see that the action of inhibitory synapses also contributes
to synaptic integration. The IPSPs can be subtracted from EPSPs, making
the postsynaptic neuron less likely to fire action potentials. In addition,
shunting inhibition acts to drastically reduce rm and consequently 	, thus
allowing positive current to flow out across the membrane instead of internally
down the dendrite toward the spike-initiation zone.
The Geometry of Excitatory and Inhibitory Synapses. Inhibitory
synapses in the brain that use GABA or glycine as a neurotransmitter always
have a morphology characteristic of Gray’s type II (see Figure 5.7b). This
structure contrasts with excitatory synapses that use glutamate, which always
have a Gray’s type I morphology. This correlation between structure and
function has been useful for working out the geometric relationships among
excitatory and inhibitory synapses on individual neurons. In addition to
being spread over the dendrites, inhibitory synapses on many neurons are
found clustered on the soma and near the axon hillock, where they are in an especially powerful position to influence the activity of the postsynaptic
neuron.
Most of the postsynaptic mechanisms we’ve discussed so far involve transmitter
receptors that are, themselves, ion channels. To be sure, synapses
with transmitter-gated channels carry the bulk of the specific information
that is processed by the nervous system. However, there are many synapses
with G-protein-coupled neurotransmitter receptors that are not directly associated
with an ion channel. Synaptic activation of these receptors does
not directly evoke EPSPs and IPSPs, but instead modifies the effectiveness of
EPSPs generated by other synapses with transmitter-gated channels. This
type of synaptic transmission is called modulation. We’ll give you a taste
for how modulation influences synaptic integration by exploring the effects
of activating one type of G-protein-coupled receptor in the brain, the
norepinephrine beta (
) receptor.
The binding of the amine neurotransmitter norepinephrine (NE) to the

 receptor triggers a cascade of biochemical events within the cell. In short,
the 
 receptor activates a G-protein that, in turn, activates an effector protein,
the intracellular enzyme adenylyl cyclase. Adenylyl cyclase catalyzes
the chemical reaction that converts adenosine triphosphate (ATP), the
product of oxidative metabolism in the mitochondria, into a compound
called cyclic adenosine monophosphate, or cAMP, that is free to diffuse
within the cytosol. Thus, the first chemical message of synaptic transmission
(the release of NE into the synaptic cleft) is converted by the 
 receptor
into a second message (cAMP); cAMP is an example of a second
messenger.
The effect of cAMP is to stimulate another enzyme known as a protein
kinase. Protein kinases catalyze a chemical reaction called phosphorylation,
the transfer of phosphate groups (PO3) from ATP to specific sites on
cell proteins (Figure 5.21). The significance of phosphorylation is that it can
change the conformation of a protein, thereby changing that protein’s activity.
In some neurons, one of the proteins that is phosphorylated when cAMP
rises is a particular type of potassium channel in the dendritic membrane.
Phosphorylation causes this channel to close, thereby reducing the membrane
K conductance. By itself, this does not cause any dramatic effects on the
neuron. But consider the wider consequence: decreasing the K+ conductance
increases the dendritic membrane resistance and therefore increases the length constant.
It is like wrapping the leaky garden hose in duct tape; more water can
flow down the inside of the hose and less leaks out the sides. As a consequence
of increasing 	, distant or weak excitatory synapses will become
more effective in depolarizing the spike-initiation zone beyond threshold;
the cell will become more excitable. Thus, the binding of NE to 
 receptors
produces little change in membrane potential but greatly increases the
response produced by another neurotransmitter at an excitatory synapse.
Because this effect involves several biochemical intermediaries, it can last
far longer than the presence of the modulatory transmitter itself.
We have described one particular G-protein-coupled receptor and the
consequences of activating it in one type of neuron. But it is important to
recognize that other types of receptor can lead to the formation of other
types of second messenger molecules. Activation of each of these receptor
types will initiate a distinct cascade of biochemical reactions in the postsynaptic
neuron that do not always include phosphorylation and decreases
in membrane conductance. In fact, cAMP in a different cell type with different
enzymes may produce functionally opposite changes in the excitability
of cells.
In Chapter 6, we will describe more examples of synaptic modulation
and their mechanisms. However, you can already see that modulatory
forms of synaptic transmission offer an almost limitless number of ways
that information encoded by presynaptic impulse activity can be transformed
and used by the postsynaptic neuron.
In this chapter, we have covered the basic principles of chemical synaptic
transmission. The action potential that arose in the sensory nerve when
you stepped on that thumbtack in Chapter 3, and swept up the axon in
Chapter 4, has now reached the axon terminal in the spinal cord. The depolarization
of the terminal triggered the presynaptic entry of Ca2 through
voltage-gated calcium channels, which then stimulated exocytosis of the
contents of synaptic vesicles. Liberated neurotransmitter diffused across the
synaptic cleft and attached to specific receptors in the postsynaptic membrane.
The transmitter (probably glutamate) caused transmitter-gated channels
to open, which allowed positive charge to enter the postsynaptic dendrite.
Because the sensory nerve was firing action potentials at a high rate,
and because many synapses were activated at the same time, the EPSPs
summed to bring the spike-initiation zone of the postsynaptic neuron to
threshold, and this cell then generated action potentials. If the postsynaptic
cell were a motor neuron, this activity would cause the release of ACh
at the neuromuscular junction and muscle contraction. If the postsynaptic
cell were an interneuron that used GABA as a neurotransmitter, the activity
of the cell would result in inhibition of its synaptic targets. If this cell used
a modulatory transmitter such as NE, the activity could cause lasting changes
in the excitability or metabolism of its synaptic targets. It is this rich diversity
of chemical synaptic interactions that allows complex behaviors (such
as shrieking with pain as you jerk up your foot) to emerge from simple
stimuli (such as stepping on a thumbtack).
Although we surveyed chemical synaptic transmission in this chapter, we
did not cover the chemistry of synaptic transmission in any detail. In Chapter
6, we’ll take a closer look at the chemical “nuts and bolts” of different
neurotransmitter systems. In Chapter 15, after we’ve examined the sensory
and motor systems in Part II, we’ll explore the contributions of several different
neurotransmitters to nervous system function and behavior. You’ll
see that the chemistry of synaptic transmission warrants all this attention
because defective neurotransmission is the basis for many neurological and
psychiatric disorders. And virtually all psychoactive drugs, both therapeutic
and illicit, exert their effects at chemical synapses.
In addition to providing explanations for aspects of neural information
processing and the effects of drugs, knowledge of chemical synaptic transmission
is also the key to understanding the neural basis of learning and
memory. Memories of past experiences are established by modification of the
effectiveness of chemical synapses in the brain. Material discussed in this
chapter suggests possible sites of modification, ranging from changes in presynaptic
Ca2 entry and neurotransmitter release to alterations in postsynaptic
receptors or excitability. As we shall see in Chapter 25, all of these changes
are likely to contribute to the storage of information by the nervous system.