Walking is a complex motor programme involving coordinated and distributed
activity across the brain and the spinal cord. Halting appropriately at the correct time
is a critical component of walking control. Despite progress in identifying neurons
driving halting1–6, the underlying neural circuit mechanisms responsible for
overruling the competing walking state remain unclear. Here, using connectomeinformed
models7–9 and functional studies, we explain two fundamental mechanisms
by which Drosophila implement context-appropriate halting. The first mechanism
(‘walk-OFF’) relies on GABAergic neurons that inhibit specific descending walking
commands in the brain, whereas the second mechanism (‘brake’) relies on excitatory
cholinergic neurons in the nerve cord that lead to an active arrest of stepping
movements. We show that two neurons that deploy the walk-OFF mechanism inhibit
distinct populations of walking-promotion neurons, leading to differential halting of
forward walking or turning. The brake neurons, by constrast, override all walking
commands by simultaneously inhibiting descending walking-promotion neurons and
increasing the resistance at the leg joints. We characterized two behavioural contexts
in which the distinct halting mechanisms were used by the animal in a mutually
exclusive manner: the walk-OFF mechanism was engaged for halting during feeding
and the brake mechanism was engaged for halting and stability during grooming.
Walking recruits distributed neural activity across the brain6,10–12 and
spinal cord13,14 or nerve cord15,16. When an animal halts, the net output of
this distributed neural activity notably changes to arrest leg stepping
movements. Moreover, depending on the behavioural context, animals
halt in different context-appropriate ways. Whereas a few specific neuronal
types driving halting have been recently described1,2,4–6,17,18, how
walking-related neural activity changes to allow halting in a manner
that is both mechanically stable and appropriate to the behavioural
context is at present unclear.
Identification of halt neurons
To identify neurons involved in halting in Drosophila, we optogenetically
activated specific neurons that innervate the suboesophageal
zone (SEZ) of the fly brain19,20, a region that houses the neurons close to
and including the descending output of the brain21 (analogous to mammalian
brainstem22). Through this neural-activation screen (Methods),
we identified 11 genetic drivers that were both relatively sparse and
caused halting without gross motor deficits (Extended Data Fig. 1a).
Among these lines, we could unambiguously pinpoint three causal
neurons for halting, which we refer to as Foxglove (FG), Bluebell (BB)
and Brake (BRK) (Fig. 1). We identified split-Gal4 reagents that targeted
FG, BB and BRK with little to no ectopic expression and drove
robust halting as reflected by decrease in walking velocity, distance
and rotation (Fig. 1a–d and Supplementary Tables 1 and 2 for all genotypes).
Using connectome parsing tools23–26 (Methods), we identified
these neurons in the brain8,9 and nerve-cord27–29 connectomes (Fig. 1e,f
and Supplementary Table 3). Both FG and BB (anatomy described in
ref. 20) are SEZ neurons that stochastically descend until the anterior
tip of the nerve cord. The FG line has weak ectopic expression in
the mushroom body neuropil that does not contribute to the halting
phenotype (Extended Data Fig. 1b,c). The BB line also labels (often
unilaterally) an additional neuron previously described as ‘bluebird’20
(Fig. 1d). BRK is a new neuronal type discovered in this work and drives
the strongest halting phenotype (Fig. 1a–c and Extended Data Fig. 1d).
BRK comprises six ascending neurons with their somata in each of the
six leg-segment-specific neuromeres of the ventral nerve cord (VNC)
and axonal projections to the brain SEZ region (Fig. 1d–f and Extended
Data Fig. 2a,b). By activating subsets of BRK neurons, we found that activating
any of the BRK neurons is sufficient to drive halting (Extended
Data Fig. 2c–g). Consistent with this, in the connectome, we found that
although each BRK gets distinct inputs, all the six BRK share common
major outputs in their two output zones, the tectulum30 of the VNC
and the SEZ of the brain (Extended Data Fig. 2a,b).
Analysis of walking velocities on FG, BB or BRK stimulation
(Fig. 1a–c) hinted at potential differences in the halting phenotypes.
To precisely quantify such differences, we performed, high-resolution
three-dimensional (3D) leg kinematics analysis (Methods, Extended
Data Fig. 3a,b and Supplementary Video 1). BRK drove low-latency,
long-duration halting bouts (Extended Data Fig. 3c) with joint angles
locked in a specific position for the entire halt duration (Fig. 1g and
Extended Data Fig. 3e). By contrast, FG and BB induced halts were interspersed
with leg movements. FG drove long halting bouts like BRK
but still allowed brief repositioning of legs (Fig. 1g and Extended Data
Fig. 3e). BB drove stationary periods interspersed with slow walking
and allowed more leg movements (Fig. 1g and Supplementary Video 1).
Unlike BRK, both FG and BB stimulated flies often took a few steps
before halting (Extended Data Fig. 3d).
Defining the genetic drivers and connectome identities of ‘halt’ neurons
driving distinct types of halting, allowed us to next address their
interaction with the walking-promoting circuits.
Diversity in walk–halt interactions
To address if and how the newly identified halt neurons interact with
walking-promoting pathways, we leveraged genetic tools targeting
walking-promoting (‘walk’) neurons characterized in our previous
work, namely P9 (DNp09) that drives forward turning19,21, BPN (bolt
protocerebral neuron) that drives straight forward walking19 and MDN
(moonwalker descending neuron) that drives backward walking31. We
combined split-Gal4 reagents for the walk and halt neurons and confirmed
opsin expression in the desired neurons (Extended Data Fig. 4a).
Here, in addition to the three halt neuron driver lines, and to confirm
the role of BB, we used another driver line (SS31328, Extended Data
Fig. 1b,c) that targets FG + BB without any ectopic expression. Using
these tools, we performed all possible combinations of ‘walk + halt’
coactivations.
BRK stimulation completely suppressed all walking commands
(forward, backward and turning), suggesting that it drives a dominant
halting mechanism (Fig. 2). By contrast, FG and BB activation affected
the walk neuron phenotypes with varying degrees and specificity, suggesting
distinct halting mechanisms being deployed in these cases.
During coactivation with MDN, unlike BRK, FG and BB did not
suppress backward walking (Fig. 2a,d,g,j). However, the intermittent
switches to forward walking observed during continuous MDN
stimulation (Methods) were absent (FG + MDN) or markedly reduced
(BB + MDN) as seen in the individual trial velocity traces (Extended
Data Fig. 4b and Supplementary Video 2). This suggests that FG and
BB predominantly suppress forward walking.
Consistent with this, when FG or BB were coactivated with P9, the flies
showed a marked reduction in forward velocity (Fig. 2b,h). BB + P9 or
FG + BB + P9 coactivated flies also showed a corresponding decrease in
angular velocity compared to P9-stimulated flies (Fig. 2e,k). However,
FG + P9 coactivated flies still showed a large increase in angular velocity
at stimulation onset. We found that while the BB + P9 or FG + BB + P9
flies were predominantly halting during the optogenetic stimulation,
FG + P9 flies were pivoting on the spot (Extended Data Fig. 4c and Supplementary
Video 3). These observations revealed an unexpected
modularity in the P9 downstream pathway into two components: a
forward walking component that is suppressed by both FG and BB
and a turning component that is suppressed by BB. As the FG + BB line
(targets FG and BB) has a similar phenotype as the BB line (targets BB
and ‘bluebird’), we conclude that BB and not bluebird is responsible
for the forward turning suppression.
When FG or BB was coactivated with BPN, the flies still increased
forward walking during optogenetic stimulation (Fig. 2c). Whereas
this increase in forward walking tended to be smaller than that of activation
of BPN alone, only in the case of FG could we see a statistically
significant difference in the distance quantification (Fig. 2i). Although
BPN + FG + BB coactivated flies decreased forward walking it was interspersed
with intermittent jumps possibly due to ectopic expression in
the VNC (Extended Data Fig. 4a) rendering the distance quantification
unreliable (Fig. 2i). On the basis of these results, we conclude that FG
can partially suppress the BPN driven forward walking.
To summarize, we found that (1) BRK suppresses all walking commands,
(2) FG specifically suppresses forward walking components of
P9 and BPN (partially) and (3) BB predominantly suppresses forward
turning induced by P9. The diversity in these walk–halt interactions
suggests that the neural targets and mechanisms deployed by the three
halting pathways (FG, BB, BRK) are at least partially distinct.
The walk-OFF mechanism
Guided by the whole fly brain connectome and the FlyWire toolkit26,
we asked if and where the halting and walking pathways might converge.
We identified, annotated and proofread all the walk and halt
neuronal types and their downstream partners in the connectome8,9
(Extended Data Fig. 5a and Supplementary Table 3). We found no direct
connections between the walk and halt neurons. However, all the walk
and halt neurons share a common output zone, the SEZ, where they
could converge on same output neurons. Even though MDN and P9
are descending neurons (DNs) that project from the brain to the VNC,
they have collaterals in the SEZ through which they recruit other neurons
including DNs. Decapitated MDN flies, in which these SEZ collaterals
are eliminated, show backward walking on optogenetic stimulation32
indicating that the VNC circuit recruited by MDNs is sufficient for driving
the phenotype. However, decapitated P9-activated flies do not show
the phenotypic forward turning (Extended Data Fig. 6e). This implies
that the other DNs recruited by P9 SEZ collaterals (Extended Data
Fig. 6a) are critical for the phenotype. Indeed, some P9 downstream
DNs (DNa02 and DNb02) were previously implicated in turning15,33,34.
BPN is a higher brain neuron19 that directly recruits other DNs through
SEZ outputs. We therefore focused on identifying whether halting pathway
projections to the SEZ impinge on DNs recruited by P9 and BPN.
To comprehensively analyse interaction between halting and
walking pathways, we used a connectome-constrained whole-brain
spiking-network model to reproduce the behavioural coactivation
experiments in silico. The model (ref. 7 and Methods), uses the entire
connectivity matrix from the FlyWire data8, and assigns positive or negative
weight to the connection based on synapse number and predicted
neurotransmitter35. We validated the neurotransmitter predictions
for the halt neurons and confirmed that FG and BB are γ-aminobutyric
acid (GABA)ergic (inhibitory) neurons, whereas BRK is an excitatory
(potential cholinergic) neuronal type (Extended Data Fig. 5b–f).
Comparing responses across top 100 responding neurons in each in
silico coactivation experiment (heatmaps in Fig. 3a–h, top) show that all
three halt neurons inhibit different, partially overlapping subsets of neurons
recruited by the walk pathways. Although the P9 pathway is more
broadly and strongly inhibited by BB, the BPN pathway is more broadly
and strongly inhibited by FG (Fig. 3a–h, top, and Extended Data Fig. 6b,c).
This aligns with the corresponding behavioural phenotypes (Fig. 2).
We next focused on DNs strongly recruited by the walk pathways and
generated synapse-weighted graphs to simultaneously visualize the
connectivity and predicted firing rate (Methods and Fig. 3a–h, bottom).
In the case of P9 coactivation with halt neurons, BB suppressed the
firing rate of most of the DNs whereas FG specifically inhibited a single
DN named oDN1 (Fig. 3b,c, bottom). The BB result is consistent with
the complete suppression of P9 phenotype in behavioural experiments
(Fig. 2b,e,h,k). Given that FG only suppressed the forward walking component
of P9 phenotype (Fig. 2b,e,h,k), we infer that oDN1 is mainly
relevant for driving forward velocity but not rotational velocity.
In the case of DNs recruited by BPN, neither FG nor BB inhibits the
whole population (Fig. 3e–g, bottom). This could explain why we never
saw a complete suppression of walking in corresponding behavioural
experiments (Fig. 2c,f,i). To probe why FG has a stronger effect in behavioural
experiments, we compared the neurons that are differentially
affected by FG versus BB. BDN2 stood apart as a DN specifically and
strongly inhibited by FG (Fig. 3g, bottom, and Extended Data Fig. 6b).
Taken together, the modelling and behavioural data show that FG and
BB are positioned to directly inhibit critical nodes in the P9 and BPN
walking-promotion pathways and decrease forward and/or rotational
walking velocity. We term this the walk-OFF mechanism. Furthermore,
oDN1 and BDN2 (Fig. 3i) stood apart as important nodes to mediate
differences in BB and FG effects on the walking pathways (Fig. 3a–h
and Extended Data Fig. 6b,c). We therefore generated split-Gal4 drivers
(Extended Data Fig. 6d) to specifically target these neurons. Optogenetically
activating oDN1 and BDN2 drove walking initiation, with BDN2
showing a much stronger phenotype (Fig. 3j). Even decapitated oDN1
and BDN2 activated flies initiated robust forward walking (Extended
Data Fig. 6e) suggesting that unlike P9, the VNC outputs of these DNs are
sufficient for forward walking. However, on optogenetic silencing, only
BDN2-silenced flies showed a reduction in forward velocity (Fig. 3k).
This suggests that BDN2 might be critical during spontaneous walking,
whereas oDN1 could be redundant or recruited only in specific contexts.
Indeed, on in vivo imaging, we found that BDN2 activity is strongly
correlated to forward (but not angular) velocity of the fly (Fig. 3l and
Supplementary Video 4). Given that BDN2 is strongly inhibited by FG
and not by BB (Fig. 3f,g), this could explain why FG drives stronger
halting in spontaneously walking flies (Fig. 1a–c).
In silico coactivating BRK ascending projections, along with P9
(Fig. 3d) and BPN (Fig. 3h) showed that while BRK is excitatory, it
recruits other predicted inhibitory neurons in the SEZ to suppress
walking-promotion DNs. When coactivated with P9, BRK inhibits many
of the critical walking-promotion DNs, including oDN1. However, when
coactivated with BPN, BRK inhibits only a subset of DNs, with BDN2
being weakly inhibited. This is in contrast to the strong walking suppression
observed in the corresponding behavioural experiments (Fig. 2).
Crucially, BRK activation suppressed backward walking driven by MDN,
whose descending output in the VNC is sufficient to drive backward
walking (Fig. 2a,d,g,j). This suggests that, in addition to inhibiting some
walking-promoting pathways in the brain (walk-OFF mechanism), BRK
probably acts in the VNC to drive halting.
The ‘brake’ mechanism
The stepping cycle consists of a swing phase (leg in air) and stance
phase (leg on ground). Given the strong ‘freezing-like’, BRK phenotype
(Fig. 1g), we wondered whether BRK could cause the legs to ‘freeze’ at
any point during a stepping cycle similar to a recent report in mice2.
We found that in case of BRK mid-swing stimulation, the leg finishes
the swing phase in an unaltered manner, but freezes as soon as it
lands on the ground (Fig. 4a) when the femur–tibia (Fe–Ti) joint is
in an extended position (Fig. 4c). Indeed, in these cases, swing duration
is not altered when compared to prestimulus swing duration
(Fig. 4d). However, for BRK mid-stance stimulation, the leg stays
locked in place at the onset of the stimulation (Fig. 4a) leading to a
broad Fe–Ti joint distribution across flies and trials (Fig. 4c). This is in
contrast to FG stimulation in which the leg always assumes a relaxed
stance position, regardless of when the optogenetic stimulus started
(Fig. 4b,c). A similar result was obtained for other leg joints, suggesting
it is not a Fe–Ti joint-specific phenomenon (Extended Data Fig. 6f
and Methods).
This locking of joints during stance phase shows that the BRK phenotype
is probably due to an active mechanism. We proposed that
this could be driven by BRK VNC outputs upregulating the postural
resistance reflex to lock the leg joints. The term ‘resistance reflex’
is used to describe postural reflexes in all legged animals that allow
maintenance of posture while in a stationary state36. Upregulating
such reflexes could lead to locking of leg joints while in stance phase
as seen on BRK stimulation.
To test this hypothesis, we activated either MDN or MDN + BRK in
decapitated flies and analysed their leg kinematics. As reported earlier32,
decapitated flies showed backward walking on MDN activation. However,
decapitated MDN + BRK stimulated flies remained stationary
(Fig. 4e). This confirms that a VNC-specific circuit is recruited by BRK
to arrest leg movements. During backward walking, the Fe–Ti joint
of the front leg is extended before a swing is initiated (Fig. 4f,g). We
therefore refer to Fe–Ti angles above 107° (Methods) as the ‘swing initiation
zone’ (SIZ). On MDN + BRK stimulation, the Fe–Ti angle remained
locked in place, and in most cases never reached the SIZ (Fig. 4h). In the
few cases when it reached the SIZ (Fig. 4f), this rarely led to levation
of the leg. The leg, despite being in an extended Fe–Ti position still
remained firmly perched on the substrate as indicated by increased
dwell time in SIZ (Fig. 4i) and decreased swing events in SIZ (Fig. 4j and
Supplementary Video 5).
We performed a complementary analysis for forward walking while
activating BDN2 or BDN2 + BRK in decapitated flies. In contrast to
backward walking, during forward walking the SIZ for front-leg Fe–Ti
lies in flexed angle values (Fig. 4g, SIZ is Fe–Ti less than 68°, Methods).
Despite this difference, coactivation with BRK interrupted forward
walking (Fig. 4e and Extended Data Fig. 6g,h) in a similar manner to
that seen for backward walking (Fig. 4f–j and Supplementary Video 5).
Taken together, this showed that BRK activation led the flies to resist
both flexion and extension at the Fe–Ti joint.
Resisting such movements, would require actively engaging specific
leg muscles. We, therefore activated BRK and monitored front-leg
femoral muscle activity with the Fe–Ti joint restrained in a flexed
or extended position (Methods). In a flexed Fe–Ti position, activating
BRK recruited accessory flexor-a and extensor. However, in an
extended Fe–Ti position, BRK stimulation recruited accessory flexor-a
and accessory flexor-b (Fig. 4k–n and Supplementary Video 6). Based
on the literature37,38, we inferred that accessory flexor-a corresponds
to the muscles innervated by slow motor neurons (also referred to as
‘reductors’) and is also implicated in maintaining joint position38,39.
The position of accessory flexor-b indicates they are probably innervated
by intermediate and/or fast flexor motor neurons that drive flexion
movement that would resist forced extension. Extensors on the
other hand, drive Fe–Ti extension and would therefore resist forced
flexion. Thus, the muscle activity profile driven by BRK resembles a
resistance-like state in each Fe–Ti position. Even in cases when there
was spontaneous, prestimulus muscle activity, BRK drove a concerted
change including inhibition of highly active muscles and activation
of specific muscles to reach this same resistance state-like activity
profile (Extended Data Fig. 7a,b and Supplementary Video 7).
To confirm this represents a resistance reflex-like activity, we passively
flexed or extended the Fe–Ti joint and induced resistance reflex
while monitoring muscle activity (Methods). Here, both control flies
and BRK stimulated flies resisted these passive movements and showed
a similar recruitment of muscles to that described above, with BRK stimulated
flies showing a more robust response (Extended Data Fig. 7c).
Taken together, this suggests that BRK drives a resistance-like state in
the femoral muscles.
FG or BB activation did not induce any robust muscle activity in similar
experiments (Extended Data Fig. 7d). Only in cases where there was
prestimulus spontaneous muscle activity did FG lead to gradual inhibition
of this activity (Extended Data Fig. 7e,f). We reasoned this could be
because FG inhibits DNs driving the prestimulus spontaneous activity.
Combining the kinematics and muscle-imaging results, we conclude
that BRK drives a stance phase-specific resistance state at the leg joints
by means of a VNC-specific neural circuit.
FG and BB are required during foraging
We next addressed if and when the animals use the FG, BB and BRK
halting pathways. Mining the connectome for inputs to the halting
neurons revealed that FG and BB are downstream to the sugar sensory
pathway, and directly connected to Fdg neurons previously shown to
drive halting and proboscis extension for feeding40,41 (Fig. 5a). We therefore
activated sugar gustatory receptor neurons (GRNs) both in silico
and in vivo. In both cases, FG was strongly recruited whereas BB showed
weak and variable activity. (Fig. 5a,b). Moreover, in vivo, FG showed
stronger responses in starved flies compared to fed flies (Extended
Data Fig. 8a,b), whereas BB only responded (weakly) in starved flies
(Extended Data Fig. 8c,d). These state-dependent responses could
be driven by differences in the feeding drive due to hunger signals
impinging on the sugar sensory pathway41. To understand how different
feeding and walking drives might converge on the previously
implicated walking-promotion nodes (oDN1 and BDN2), we coactivated
sugar GRNs with either P9 or BPN walk neurons at varying activity levels,
and monitored oDN1 and BDN2 firing rates, respectively. Both oDN1
and BDN2 were tightly regulated as a function of walking and feeding
pathway stimulation, showing that there is an excitation–inhibition
balance at these nodes (Fig. 5c,d). To test whether FG is critical for relaying
the inhibition from sugar GRNs to the walking nodes, we repeated
the above simulation, but while silencing FG in the model. This clearly
shifted the excitation–inhibition balance at the walking nodes, such
that we could now see release of inhibition on oDN1 and BDN2 when
compared to the results in the FG intact model (Fig. 5c,d). This suggests
that FG may be relevant for halting in the context of foraging and feeding.
Because BB is only weakly recruited in our model, we did not see
big changes at BDN2 or oDN1 when we repeated the simulation with
BB silenced (Extended Data Fig. 8e).
To confirm the role of halt neurons during feeding, we optogenetically
silenced these neurons, while providing starved flies with
a choice between blank substrate (dried filter paper) versus sucrose
substrate (dried filter paper + sucrose, where flies can sense the
sucrose but cannot consume it42). Control flies or flies with BRK or
BB silenced spent most of their time on the sucrose side, whereas FG
silenced flies were unable to preferentially stay on the sucrose side
(Fig. 5e and Extended Data Fig. 8k), confirming the importance of FG
for stopping on sugar detection. At the start of this assay, flies were
randomly distributed on the sucrose and blank side making it difficult
to analyse locomotor changes when the fly first encountered the
sucrose. To analyse these first encounters, we quantified interaction
of flies with a small food-blob, placed at the centre of a large circular
arena (Fig. 5f). All flies slowed down when they first encountered the
food-blob, probably because, unlike the previous assay, here they could
detect the food-blob by textural changes and consume it. However,
FG- and BB-silenced flies showed shorter stopping bouts and increased
velocities near the blob compared to controls (Fig. 5g–h and Extended
Data Fig. 8f–i). Specifically, BB-silenced flies were indistinguishable
from controls before food encounter, but showed prolonged increase
in both translational and angular velocities after food encounter
(Extended Data Fig. 8f–i). This could show a potential role for BB in
constraining forward and angular velocities during foraging-type
behaviours that involve a local search following food encounter43,44.
Such post food-encounter behavioural state transitions have been
well described in flies43,44. However, these are not accounted for in
our computational model, or in the functional imaging experiments
(fly tethered vertically and cannot walk, Methods). This could explain
the weaker BB responses observed on in vivo or in silico sugar-GRN
stimulation.
Taken together, this confirms that FG and BB are recruited for halting
and locomotor control in the context of feeding and foraging. Notably,
connectomics revealed that this halting pathway diverges from
the previously described proboscis extension pathway7,41 (Fig. 5a). In
agreement with this, FG or BB silencing had no effect on the proboscis
extension response (PER) when tethered flies were presented with
sucrose (Extended Data Fig. 8j).
BRK is required during grooming
To understand when flies recruit BRK neurons, we monitored in vivo
BRK activity in spontaneous walking and halting flies (Methods and
Fig. 6a). We imaged a region of the VNC that permits identification of the
axons belonging to each of the six BRK neurons (Fig. 6b,c). We noticed
that BRK is recruited only during a subset of halting events. By annotating
synchronously recorded behaviour we found that BRK activity
correlated with either ‘ball-pushing’ or ‘grooming’ events (Fig. 6d–f).
As ball-pushing is probably a special behaviour that only happens in a
tethered fly walking on an air-supported ball, we focused on the grooming
events. BRK activity correlated in a segment-specific manner to the
respective grooming events (Fig. 6f). Most prominent among these
were front-leg rubs and hind-leg rubs that coincided with large correlated
activity bumps in front and hind BRK, respectively (Fig. 6d–f and
Supplementary Video 9). Aligning BRK activity profile across multiple
flies and grooming events, showed that the segment-specific BRK activity
starts ramping up before the grooming event and synchronized with
a coincident dip in walking velocity (Fig. 6g,h).
Fittingly, in the connectome, we found that DNg12, a command
neuron that drives head-grooming with front legs45 provides most
input to front BRK (BRK1-2), whereas wPN1, a command neuron that
drives wing grooming with hind legs46 provides most input to hind BRK
(BRK5-6, Extended Data Figs. 5a and 9a–c). We also identified potential
leg-grooming sensory-motor pathways from each leg to corresponding
segment BRK neurons (Extended Data Fig. 9b). Thus, BRK neurons
receive distinct segment-specific grooming command inputs. However,
all BRK share common outputs (Extended Data Fig. 2b) that lead to
halting with upregulation of postural reflexes (Fig. 4). What could be
the role of the BRK outputs during grooming?
During grooming, flies halt and lift a subset of legs (usually two
legs) while supporting their body weight on the remaining stationary
legs. We wondered whether BRK was necessary for both halting and
stability during grooming. We therefore optogenetically silenced BRK
in flies that were induced to groom by powdering them47,48. BRK silencing
did not abolish grooming, but led to interruption of continuous
grooming by intermittent walking events (Fig. 6i–k) confirming BRK’s
role for halting during grooming. Control flies or flies with FG or BB
silenced showed prolonged uninterrupted grooming (Fig. 6i–k). Moreover,
we found that BRK silenced flies become destabilized during
grooming (Supplementary Video 10). To address if this destabilization
was due to the VNC outputs of BRK, we repeated this experiment in
decapitated flies. Consistent with the literature48, control decapitated
flies showed robust grooming when covered with powder. Because
decapitated flies do not have an inherent forward walking drive like
intact flies, it was unsurprising that we did not see any walking on
BRK silencing. However, we saw that powdered, decapitated BRK
silenced flies often lost their balance and tripped while grooming,
confirming BRK’s role in stabilization during grooming (Fig. 6l and
Supplementary Video 10).
On the basis of the above observations, and given that BRK output
only affects legs in stance, we proposed that BRK is recruited
by segment-specific grooming commands to halt and stabilize the
posture of the stationary (non-grooming) legs used for balancing the
body weight. For instance, during front grooming, command neurons
(DNg12s) would recruit the front BRKs that in turn stabilize mid and
hind legs (Fig. 6m), whereas during hind grooming, the corresponding
grooming commands (wPN1) would recruit hind-BRKs that in turn
stabilize the front and mid-legs (Fig. 6p).
To test this segment-specific role of BRK, we designed an assay
in which we silenced BRK subsets, while inducing segment-specific
grooming. We generated split-Gal4 lines that targeted front BRK
(BRK1-2), front + mid-BRK (BRK1-4) or front + hind BRK (BRK1-2,
BRK-5-6), and confirmed that activating these BRK subsets drives
halting in all cases (Extended Data Fig. 9d,e). Next, we optogenetically
silenced these BRK subsets and induced front or hind grooming
using a powdered brush in tethered decapitated flies placed on
an air-supported ball (Supplementary Video 11). We performed leg
kinematics analysis of front and hind legs (Methods). As expected,
control flies were stable during the grooming events as indicated by
low ball movement and low Fe–Ti movement of the non-grooming legs
(Fig. 6n–r and Extended Data Fig. 9g–h). Conversely, when front-BRK
silenced flies were induced to perform front grooming, they were
destabilized as shown by increased ball movement (Fig. 6n) and
hind-leg movements (Fig. 6o and Extended Data Fig. 9g). However,
if flies with silenced front BRK but intact hind BRK (front-BRK>GtACR1
or front + mid-BRK>GtACR1), were induced to perform hind grooming,
they showed control-like behaviour and groomed hind legs while
stabilizing the front legs (Fig. 6n–o and Extended Data Fig. 9h). On the
other hand, flies with hind BRK silenced (front + hind BRK>GtACR1
or all-BRK>GtACR1), were destabilized during hind grooming bouts
(Fig. 6q,r and Extended Data Fig. 9h).
Taken together, this shows that BRK is recruited in a segment-specific
manner for halting and stability in the context of grooming. We thus
explain distinct contexts in which each halting pathway is recruited.
Consistent with this, activating head-bristle sensory projections
(grooming context) in the brain connectome model, drove strong
activity in DNg12s (BRK inputs) but not in FG or BB, whereas activating
sugar GRNs (feeding context) recruited FG and BB but not DNg12s
(BRK inputs) (Extended Data Fig. 9c).
Connectomics predicts halt neurons
Having identified the critical nodes in the walking pathways that are
targeted by halt neurons, we aimed to gain insight into other halting
pathways that could be relevant in other contexts. Although we could
not identify some previously described slowing4 or halting5 neurons
in the connectome, we could locate two neurons that were implicated
indirectly in promoting halting, namely MAN (assists backward walking
by inhibiting forward walking31) and oviDN (command neuron for
egg-laying49 that also induces halting50). In similar simulations as in
Fig. 3, both MAN and oviDN, through predicted GABAergic neurons
(G129, CB283), suppressed walking-promotion neurons including oDN1
and BDN2 (Extended Data Fig. 10a,b). This showed other routes in addition
to FG, BB, BRK that could inhibit walking-promotion nodes. To find
all such routes, we generated a list of predicted halt neurons (Extended
Data Fig. 10c,d) as those with strong inhibitory inputs to oDN1 and
BDN2, most of which also inhibit other potential walking-promotion
DNs (for example, cDN1, BDN4). As these neurons will ultimately control
the excitation–inhibition balance at the walking-promotion nodes,
these could also be involved in velocity control (‘slowing down’) and not
just halting. These predicted halt neurons receive input from different
upstream neurons, and could underlie halting in other behavioural
contexts (fear, sleep, courtship and so on).
Discussion
Our work explains two fundamental halting mechanisms in Drosophila.
The first mechanism, categorized as the walk-OFF mechanism
causes halting by inhibition of walking-promotion neurons. This
could be compared to taking one’s foot off the gas pedal of a car,
and is analogous to action-suppression mechanisms proposed in
different behaviours including walking, across organisms11,51–56. In
this connectomics-driven work, we could go beyond identification of
this mechanism and gain major insights into the organization of the
halting and walking-control circuits in flies. We found that (1) walking
initiation neurons (P9, BPN, MDN) recruit populations of heterogeneous
DNs by means of SEZ outputs that are poised to recruit multiple
downstream VNC circuits for initiating specific walking patterns,
(2) halting and walking pathways converge at specific nodes in these DN
populations (for example, oDN1, BDN2) whose excitation–inhibition
balance probably dictates the walking state and (3) different halting
pathways inhibit different subsets of walking-promotion DNs.
Specifically, turning and forward-walking-promoting DNs could be
differentially inhibited by BB and FG, respectively. This shows a modularity
in the descending control of turning and forward walking that
is consistent with recent results from neuronal population imaging
and modelling work in Drosophila12,34,57. This also aligns with modularity
at the level of brainstem spinal projection neurons observed
in vertebrates (zebrafish58, mice6,18,59), indicating that vertebrates
could also have halting pathways that differentially inhibit forward
locomotion and turning.
The second mechanism, categorized as the brake mechanism, drives
active resistance at the leg joints in the legs that are on the ground
(stance phase), much like the brakes of a car resisting motion of the
wheels. Also, similarly to how one releases the accelerator pedal while
pressing on the brakes to avoid skidding, the newly identified BRK
neurons inhibit the walking-promotion DNs through their brain outputs
while simultaneously promoting resistance in the legs through
their VNC outputs. The pathway from BRK to leg muscles is probably
gated by proprioceptive inputs that confer the stance phase-specific
behavioural response (Extended Data Fig. 9f). This BRK mechanism is
consistent with their recruitment during grooming when the fly needs
to both inhibit walking and balance its body on a subset of stationary
legs. A similar mechanism could be relevant in other halting contexts
in flies (for example, when flies lift their legs for lunging during aggression)
or other animals for execution of halting with increased stability.
Recent work in mice has uncovered a brainstem neuronal population
(Chx10-Gi) that drives halting with legs in stance1,59. However, these
neurons were not shown to drive upregulation of postural reflexes
as seen for BRK. Moreover, recent work shows subsets of Chx10-Gi
neurons being relevant in different aspects of walking, stopping, turning
or grooming18,59,60. Our results encourage the search for BRK-like
mechanism in these Chx10-Gi subsets or other BRK-analogous spinal
ascending pathways in vertebrates.
Comparing across connectome-informed circuits of all verified or
predicted halting pathways in this study, we isolated a generic neural circuit
motif for halting. For promoting halting to allow stationary behaviours
such as feeding, egg-laying or grooming, the halting pathway
branches off from the behaviour-specific sensory-motor pathway and
impinges on walking-promoting circuits (Extended Data Fig. 10f). The
halt neurons themselves need not encode for the behavioural-specific
motor output (for example, proboscis extension, ovipositor extrusion
or grooming movements) but rather drive the initiation and maintenance
of a halted state during the behaviour. This halting branch
is typically located downstream to command-like neurons in the
sensory-motor circuit (note that predicted halt neurons also receive
their inputs primarily in the SEZ region, which is closer to the output
of the brain, Extended Data Fig. 10e,f). This emergence of modularity
downstream in the circuit could be an efficient circuit-design for targeting
similar population of walking-promotion neurons in different
contexts.
Despite this conserved motif shared across all halting pathways,
the specific targets and mechanisms deployed by the halt neurons
are distinct. This distinction may confer the specificity to how halting
versus walking decisions are executed in a context-appropriate manner.