Almost all living organisms from humans to bacteria possess
a circadian clock (Dunlap, 1999). This internal timekeeping
system enables organisms to anticipate and adapt to the
rhythmic environmental changes that occur over a 24-hour
cycle. At their molecular core, these clocks are comprised of
cell-autonomous transcription-translation negative feedback
loops (Takahashi, 2017). In most animals, the master
circadian clock in the brain receives light cues via the eyes
which enable synchronization (or entrainment) with the external
24-hour light-dark cycles. The master clock sits at the
top of the hierarchy and in turn modulates the activity of
downstream neurons, as well as the peripheral clocks located
in tissues throughout the body via endocrine and systemic
signaling. In vertebrates, the master clock is located in
the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) of the hypothalamus
and is comprised of approximately 20,000 neurons (Mohawk
et al., 2012). Extensive intercellular coupling between these
neurons likely via neurotransmitters, neuropeptides, and
gap junctions forms a neuronal network that is resilient to
internal and environmental perturbations (Maywood et al.,
2006, Liu et al., 2007). Systematic characterization of these
diverse coupling mechanisms between clock neurons is thus
crucial to understanding circadian clock entrainment and
the mutual coupling of the clock neurons. In addition, unraveling
the clock output pathways which generate rhythmic
behaviors and hormonal signaling can provide mechanistic
insights into circadian regulation of organismal physiology
and homeostasis.
These aims are particularly challenging to accomplish in
vertebrates due to the large neuronal network size and resultant
increase in complexity. However, the molecular
clock architecture as well as the neuronal network motifs are
highly conserved from humans to insects (Panda et al., 2002,
Helfrich-Förster, 2004). Hence, Drosophila melanogaster
with its powerful genetic toolkit and a complete brain connectome
represents an ideal system for deciphering the
clock network and its input and output pathways (Zheng et
al., 2018, Dorkenwald et al., 2023, Schlegel et al., 2023). Not
surprisingly, the fly circadian clock, generally regarded to be
comprised of approximately 150 neurons, is extremely well
characterized (Dubowy and Sehgal, 2017). These neurons
have historically been classified into different groups of Lateral
and Dorsal Neurons (LN and DN, respectively) based on
their size, anatomy, location in the brain, and differences in
gene expression (Abruzzi et al., 2017). Further, these neuronal
subgroups are active at different times during the day
and are consequently distinct functionally (Liang et al.,
2016). Single-cell transcriptome sequencing analyses of
clock neurons recently revealed additional heterogeneity
within some of these clusters, which can largely be explained
by neuronal signaling molecules that they express (Ma et al.,
2021, Ma et al., 2023). Comprehensive mapping of the synaptic
partners of clock neurons and comparing this connectivity
can determine if the molecular heterogeneity based on
gene expression also translates into heterogenous synaptic
connectivity. Nonetheless, given the rich array of neuropeptides
expressed in clock neurons, both synaptic and paracrine
signaling appear crucial in mediating the connectivity
between clock neurons as well as their output pathways.

Here, we harnessed the power of connectomics to generate
the first comprehensive connectivity map of the circadian
clock. Intriguingly, we identified additional DN in the network,
thus showing that the Drosophila circadian clock is in
fact comprised of at least 240 neurons instead of 150 neurons.
In addition, our analyses revealed that light input from
extrinsic photoreceptors to the clock neurons is largely indirect.
Furthermore, we discovered extensive ipsilateral synaptic
connectivity between the clock neurons and identified
a subset of DN as an important hub that link the clock network
across the two brain hemispheres via contralateral projections.
We also elucidated the output pathways from the
clock network that could affect general behavioral activity
levels and organismal physiology. In particular, we characterized
clock inputs to subsets of neurosecretory cells (NSC)
in the brain which collectively represent a major neuroendocrine
center (Nässel and Zandawala, 2020). We observed
sparse monosynaptic connectivity between clock neurons
and NSC, suggesting that multi-synaptic connections and
peptidergic signaling account for most of the connectivity, as
is characteristic of the vertebrate clock output pathways
(Wen et al., 2020). Hence, as a complementary approach, we
also deciphered putative paracrine signaling pathways
within the clock network by extensively mapping the expression
of clock neuropeptides and their receptors, and filtering
them based on the topographical constraints determined by
the connectome. This peptidergic signaling greatly enriches
the connectivity within the clock network and is the major
output pathway to the neuroendocrine center which regulates
systemic physiology.
The master clock in the Drosophila brain is widely regarded
to be comprised of approximately 150 neurons. This number
is derived from neuronal expression of different clock genes
(Ma et al., 2021). Clk856-Gal4, based on the Clk promoter,
faithfully recapitulates expression in most of these clock
neurons (Figure 1A). These neurons can be broadly classified
into four classes each of LN and DN (Figure 1B and Table
1). The LN comprise Lateral Posterior Neurons (LPN),
dorsoLateral Neurons (LNd), Ion Transport Peptide (ITP)-expressing
LN (LNITP), and Pigment-Dispersing Factor (PDF)-
expressing ventroLateral Neurons (LNv
PDF). Conversely, the
DN include anterior Dorsal Neurons 1 (DN1a), posterior DN1
(DN1p), DN2 and DN3. These clock neuron classes can be further
subdivided into different cell types (Figure 1C and Table
1). Morphological characterization of some DN1p and DN3
subtypes is currently lacking (Reinhard et al., 2022b). Moreover,
the estimated number of clock neurons in Drosophila
is likely an underestimation as the precise number of DN3
has not been determined thus far (Shafer et al., 2006). This is
partly because drivers like Clk856-Gal4 only include a small
proportion of DN3 (Ma et al., 2021). In addition, most DN3
have small somata that are densely packed together, making
it difficult to count. Majority of these small DN3 project to
the central brain, and hence they are aptly called small Central
Projecting DN3 (s-CPDN3) (Table 1) (Sun et al., 2022).
Similarly, a pair of DN3 with large somata project to the central
brain (large Central Projecting DN3; l-CPDN3), whereas
about 6 neurons per brain hemisphere project to the anterior
brain (Anterior Projecting DN3; APDN3) (Sun et al., 2022).These latter cells also have larger somata than the s-CPDN3
(Reinhard et al., 2022b). Despite the large number of DN3,
previous studies suggest that they are less important for behavioral
rhythmicity compared to some of the LN, which are
regarded as the master pacemaker neurons (Rieger et al.,
2006, Yoshii et al., 2012, Li et al., 2018).
As a first step in determining the synaptic connectivity
within the clock network, we used a systematic approach
(Figure S1) to identify most, if not all, of the clock neurons
in the FlyWire connectome generated in our companion papers
(Dorkenwald et al., 2023, Schlegel et al., 2023). In total,
we successfully identified 242 clock neurons based on a combination
of morphology, previously determined connectivity,
and location of their cell soma (Figure 1C-D, Supplementary
Videos 1-2) (Schubert et al., 2018, Reinhard et al., 2022a,
Reinhard et al., 2022b, Shafer et al., 2022, Sun et al., 2022).
The number of clock neurons that we identified in the connectome
was considerably higher than the expected number
of clock neurons (~152) in the adult brain (Table 1). This was
mainly due to the presence of more s-CPDN3 in the connectome
than estimated, which prompted us to accurately
quantify the total number of DN3 in adult brains. To comprehensively
quantify DN3, we used antibodies against clock
proteins Period (PER) and Vrille (VRI) in tim-Gal4 > GFP
expressing flies. Since PER and VRI exhibit peak expression
at different Zeitgeber times (Figure 2A), the inclusion of
three clock markers (PER, VRI, and tim) can provide a reliable
estimate of the total number of DN3 (Figure 2B and C,
Supplementary Video 3). Indeed, our analyses revealed that
there are more than 70 DN3 per hemisphere in both males
and females (Figure 2D). Thus, the number of DN3 identified
in the connectome (171 neurons) is in line with our DN3 estimate
(~166 neurons) based on anatomical analysis. The
majority of these are s-CPDN3 (157 neurons) which we now
classified into five subtypes (s-CPDN3A-E) based on morphological
similarity (Figure 2E-I). These five DN3 subtypes
are comprised of 26 distinct cell types (Schlegel et al., 2023)
and could thus be subdivided further in the future.
Additionally, we also identified several candidate DN1p
which could not be classified into previously characterized
DN1p cell types (Table 1). To verify if these neurons identified
in the connectome are indeed DN1p, we characterized them
anatomically. Specifically, we performed multi-color flip out
(MCFO) analysis of DN1p using Clk4.1M-Gal4 to elucidate
the morphology of this densely packed neuronal cluster. In
total, about 14 DN1p per hemisphere are labeled with the
Clk4.1M-Gal4 (Figure 2J). MCFO analysis revealed DN1pA
(4-5 neurons) and DN1pB (2 neurons) subtypes characterized
previously (Table 1 and Figure 2K). Our analysis additionally
revealed the morphology of previously uncharacterized
DN1p subtypes (Figure 2L-N). DN1pC and DN1pE are each
comprised of two neurons per hemisphere (Figure 2L and
N). DN1pD is comprised of four neurons per hemisphere
(Figure 2M). Two of these project over the midline while the
other two remain ipsilateral, suggesting that the DN1pD is
comprised of two morphologically distinct subtypes. Notably,
our analysis confirmed that the candidate DN1p identified
from the connectome are in fact morphologically similar
to DN1pC-E subtypes labeled by Clk4.1M-Gal4. Taken together,
our identification and morphological characterization
of novel DN3 and DN1p subtypes provide a solid framework
to comprehensively examine the connectivity of clock
neurons.
The FlyWire connectome combines automatically detected
chemical synapses with proofread neurons. These synapses
represent an additional anatomical feature that could potentially
distinguish neuronal groups. Consequently, we asked
whether the classification of clock neurons based on differences
in their synaptic connectivity aligns with the traditional
anatomical and recent gene expression-based classification.
To address this, we clustered clock neurons based on
cosine similarity between their total synaptic inputs and outputs.
Our clustering analysis shows that neurons of a given
clock cell type (Table 1) usually cluster together, suggesting
that neurons from the same group are more similar (in terms
of synaptic connectivity) to each other than to other clock
neurons (Figure S2A-B). For example, all three LNd
CRY- from
one hemisphere are part of the same clade. Similarly, the two
DN2 are part of a clade. Exceptions to this are the clades containing
DN1p and DN3. For DN1p, this can be explained by our
findings which show that this group comprises five morphologically
distinct subtypes. In the case of DN3, while some of
them form their own cluster, other DN3 cluster together with
different clock neuron subtypes. On one hand, this is not unexpected
since it is unlikely for such a large group of neurons
to have similar connectivity patterns. On the other hand, this
is quite interesting since it provides insights into their possible
function. For instance, heterogenous clusters comprising
clock neurons of different classes have similar synaptic inputs
and outputs, and may thus play similar roles in the
clock network and beyond. Moreover, the connectivitybased
clustering does not resolve the five subtypes of the s-
CPDN3. This suggests that these five s-CPDN3 subtypes comprise
synaptically heterogeneous cell populations. Nonetheless,
synaptic connectivity-based classification of clock neurons
largely aligns with the ones determined based on anatomical
and gene expression differences.
Having identified all the clock neurons, we next sought to
determine their synaptic interconnectivity which could facilitate
intercellular coupling within the network. Generally,
we regarded >4 common synapses per neuron as significant
connections and >9 synapses as strong connections. We first
wanted to validate our analysis by comparing it with previously
reported connections. In agreement with previous reports
(Reinhard et al., 2022b, Shafer et al., 2022), we observed
strong synaptic connectivity from DN1a to LNITP, from DN1pA
to LNITP and LNd, and from DN1pB to DN2 clusters (Figure 1E
and S3), highlighting the robustness of our approach. Importantly,
our analysis also uncovered novel connections between
the different subgroups. Specifically, we observed strong contralateral and ipsilateral connectivity from DN1pA
to LNITP, as well as additional significant connections with s-
CPDN3C, s-CPDN3D, and LNd
CRY+ across both hemispheres.
Similarly, LNITP also provide synaptic inputs to s-CPDN3
clusters in both hemispheres (Figure 1E and S3). This raised
the question of whether DN1pA represents a heterogeneous
population where one subgroup forms ipsilateral connections
and the other contralateral. To address this, we examined
the connectivity at cellular resolution (Figure S4-S5)
which revealed that individual DN1pA indeed form both ipsilateral
and contralateral connections (Figure 1F). Our
analysis thus identified DN1pA as an important center which
links the clock network across the two brain hemispheres.
These results are in line with previous reports of contralateral
projections of DN1p (Lamaze et al., 2018). In contrast,
there are virtually no synaptic connections between the s-
LNv and the LNd neurons (Figure 1E and S3-S5), which control
morning and evening activities, respectively. This is
consistent with previous analyses using the hemibrain
connectome (Shafer et al., 2022). Interestingly, the connectivity
of clock neurons across both hemispheres is not symmetrical,
owing to the differences in the number of synapses
(Figure 1E and S3).
To assess the extent of inter-individual differences in the
numbers, neuronal projections, and synaptic connectivity of
clock neurons, we next performed comparisons with the partial
hemibrain connectome (Scheffer et al., 2020). Several
groups of clock neurons were previously identified in the
hemibrain connectome including all s-LNv, l-LNv, LNd,
LNITP, LPN, DN1a, and some DN2, DN1p, and DN3 (Reinhard
et al., 2022a, Reinhard et al., 2022b, Shafer et al., 2022). Here,
we identified additional DN1p and DN3 (Figure S6A-D). In
total, 64 clock neurons can be identified in the hemibrain
connectome, with the majority of missing neurons belonging
to the DN3 subgroups (Figure S6A-D, Supplementary Table
5). Comparison of different subgroups revealed stable
neuronal numbers across the two connectomes (Table 1 and
Figure S6D). Similarly, there is a high degree of stereotypy
in the connectivity between the clock clusters (Figure S6EF).
For instance, l-LNv and DN2 form the least synaptic contacts
with other clock clusters. At the opposite end of the
spectrum, s-CPDN3A are connected to all the clock clusters
except for s-LNv, l-LNv, DN1a, and DN1pE. Given its partial
nature, the hemibrain connectome lacks information about
all contralateral connections, reiterating the significance of
characterizing information flow across entire networks.
Taken together, our analyses revealed hitherto unknown
connectivity between the clock neurons which could contribute
to the robustness of the master clock. Moreover, the
identification of the complete circadian neuronal network in
the FlyWire connectome underscores the power of the fruit
fly in pushing forward the frontier of our understanding of
chronobiology.
Validating clock neuron connectivity using trans-synaptic
tracing
While the FlyWire and hemibrain connectomes exhibit a
high degree of stereotypy, we further used an independent
approach to validate our connectivity analyses. We
performed light microscopy-based trans-synaptic circuit
tracing by expressing trans-Tango (Talay et al., 2017) using
specific driver lines for different populations of clock
neurons (Figure S7-S8). Upon driving trans-Tango with
Clk4.1M-Gal4 which labels most DN1p (Figure S7B), we
observed post-synaptic signals in DN1p, DN2, DN3, LPN, LNd,
5th-LNv, and s-LNv (Figure S9A). However, l-LNv and DN1a
were not post-synaptic to DN1p. Thus, our trans-Tango
analysis of DN1p agrees with the connectivity of DN1p based
on the connectomes (Figure S3 and S6F). Similarly, a split-
Gal4 line targeting DN3 drives post-synaptic signals in DN1a,
DN1p, DN2, DN3, LPN, LNd, and l-LNv (Figure S9B), which
mirrors the connectivity seen in the connectomes. While
post-synaptic signal was not detected in most clock neurons
of control flies, occasionally, a false post-synaptic signal was
detected in two clock neurons (LNd) from the entire network
(Figure S10A). Hence, any potential synaptic output to LNd
should be treated with caution. Overall, we observed similar
congruency between the two approaches with other Gal4-
lines including those targeting DN2 (Figure S10B), LPN
(Figure S10C), and LNITP (Figure S10D).
Differences compared to the connectomes were observed
when driving trans-Tango with Pdf-Gal4 (for s-LNv and l-
LNv) (Figure S10E) and with the DN1a-specific split-Gal4 line
(Figure S10F). In both cases, trans-Tango generated postsynaptic
signals in more clock neurons than anticipated
based on the connectomes. This discrepancy could be
explained by: 1) the presence of additional neurons in the
Gal4 (e.g. PDF tritocerebrum neurons (Selcho et al., 2018))
and/or 2) daily remodeling of neural circuits, as shown
previously for s-LNv and DN1a (Fernandez et al., 2008, Song
et al., 2021). In summary, our trans-Tango analysis is largely
in agreement with the clock network generated using the
connectomes.
Deciphering light input pathways via in-silico retrograde
tracing of clock neurons
Following the successful validation of our connectivity data,
we next identified all the major classes of neurons providing
inputs to the clock network. To this end, we utilized the
annotation scheme of our companion paper (Schlegel et al.,
2023), which provides a hierarchical classification of all
neurons in the connectome (Figure 3A). We found that
neurons intrinsic to the brain provide the majority of the
inputs to the clock network (Figure 3A-C). This includes
visual centrifugal neurons projecting from the central brain
to the optic lobes, visual projection neurons projecting from
the optic lobes to the central brain, as well neurons intrinsic
to the optic lobes and central brain (Figure 3C). Examining
inputs to specific clock clusters, we observed differential
inputs across all the subgroups (Figure 3B). As expected, s-
LNv and l-LNv receive most of their input from optic lobe and
visual centrifugal neurons as they have a large number of
input sites in the optic lobes and the accessory medulla
(AME) (Figure S11). In contrast, APDN3, l-CPDN3, and LNITP
populations receive major inputs from visual projection
neurons. The remaining clock clusters receive most of their
inputs from central brain neurons (Figure 3B, S11, and S12).
In some cases, such as DN1pC-E, DN2, and s-CPDN3A-E, a
significant portion of these central neurons are clock
neurons themselves, confirming prominent intercellular
synaptic connectivity between some clock clusters.
Interestingly, only 4 sensory neurons provide direct inputs
to the clock network. These are anterior cells (aDT4) (Dr.
Gregory Jefferis, personal communication) (Figure 3A and
D) which provide temperature inputs to LPN, DN1pC, and
DN1pE (Jin et al., 2021, Alpert et al., 2022).
Having broadly classified the inputs from different neuronal
super classes to the clock network, we probed further and
identified individual cells providing the strongest synaptic
inputs to clock neurons. For this purpose, we used a
stringent threshold of 80 synapses to obtain a narrow list of
candidate inputs. Our analysis discovered 13 neurons,
including 7 aMe neurons (a subset of visual projection and
visual centrifugal neurons) that are strongly connected to
specific downstream clock neurons (Figure 3E). For
example, individual aMe3 and aMe6a neurons can form
more than 79 synapses with APDN3, while aMe8 are
similarly connected to LNd
CRY+ & ITP clock neurons (Figure
3E). The unifying feature of these aMe neurons is their dense
arborization in the AME and posterior lateral
protocerebrum (Figure 3E), where they anatomically
interact with clock neuron dendrites (Figure S11 and S12)
(Reinhard et al., 2022b, Tang et al., 2022). Interestingly, the
aMe neurons themselves receive strong inputs from the
extraretinal photoreceptors. Specifically, aMe3 and aMe6a
neurons receive strong inputs directly from the Hofbauer-
Buchner (HB) eyelets (Figure 3E). Conversely, aMe8 receive
indirect inputs from ocellar retinula cells via the ocellar
ganglion neurons (OCG) type 2c (OCG02c) (Figure 3E). This
suggests that the clock receives strong light inputs from
extrinsic photoreceptor cells, albeit indirectly. This is not
surprising since light is the most important Zeitgeber for
circadian clocks (Helfrich-Förster, 2020). Flies synchronize
their circadian clocks with the light-dark cycles using these
extrinsic photoreceptor cells as well as via the blue-light
photoreceptor Cryptochrome (CRY), which is expressed in
about half of the clock neurons (Figure 3F) (Helfrich-
Förster, 2020). While CRY interacts with the core clock
protein Timeless and can quickly reset the clock, the
different photoreceptor cells are important for sensing
dawn, dusk, high light intensities, and day length, and for
adapting morning and evening activities to the appropriate
time of day. Regardless, we found little direct inputs from
the photoreceptor cells and other sensory cells to the clock
neurons (Figure 3A). This is consistent with previous
findings which revealed that most of the light input to the
clock appears to be indirect (Alejevski et al., 2019). In light
of this and our in-silico circuit tracing analysis described
above, we comprehensively characterized indirect
connectivity between photoreceptor cells and clock neurons.
Therefore, we traced all the disynaptic connections between
them. Using the normal threshold of >4 synapses, we again
recovered the strong connections from the H-B eyelets via
the aMe3/aMe6a to the APDN3, and additional weaker
connections to the s-CPDN3A, LNITP, l-LNv, and LNd
CRY+
(Figure 3G). Furthermore, we revealed connections from
R7/R8 compound eye photoreceptors to several clock
neurons via aMe12 (Kind et al., 2021) and other
interneurons. While we did not observe any disynaptic
connections from the ocellar retinula cells to clock neurons
using the normal threshold (Figure 3G), reducing the
threshold to >2 synapses revealed connections from the
ocelli to APDN3 and l-CPDN3 via OCG02c (Figure 3H). The
synaptic connections from the ocelli to OCG and beyond are
extensively characterized in our companion paper and
demonstrate interesting details that may also be valid for the
other photoreceptor inputs to clock neurons (Dorkenwald et
al., 2023). The majority of ocellar photoreceptors are
synaptically connected to ocellar ganglion neurons with
thick axons (OCG01a-f) or directly to descending neurons
(DNp28). These connections likely enable fast behavioral
responses. In contrast, axons of OCG02c that connect to the
clock neurons are rather thin and not suited for fast
neurotransmission. Instead, these neurons appear suited for
collecting light information over time – a property needed
for entraining the circadian clock. Further, collecting light
information over larger time intervals may not require a
high synapse density. Thus, 3 to 4 synapses between retinula
cells and the relevant downstream OCG observed here could
be sufficient for this purpose (Figure 3H). The same is also
true for the photoreceptor cells of the compound eyes.
Reducing the threshold of significant connections from 5 to
3 synapses revealed indirect clock input from additional
photoreceptor cells, including those that project from the
dorsal rim area of the eye (Figure 3H). These photoreceptor
cells are involved in polarized vision and might contribute to
time-compensated sun compass orientation (Homberg,
2004). Whether the connectivity observed with a lower
threshold of >2 synapses is functional in vivo remains to be
seen; however, this is very likely since there are usually
many photoreceptor cells that synapse onto only a few aMe
neurons. For example, theoretically, the ~300 pale R8 cells
project to only 3-4 aMe12 neurons (Kind et al., 2021),
resulting in ~100 connections on average per aMe neuron.
Even if each of these connections were mediated via only 3
synapses, each aMe neuron could potentially receive inputs
from R8 cells via 300 synapses, which is quite substantial
(Figure 3H).
In-silico anterograde tracing of clock neurons
Delineating the output pathways that translate daily 24-hour
oscillations of the molecular clock into physiological and
behavioral rhythms remains a major focus in chronobiology.
Using the same strategy as above to identify the inputs, we
systematically classified all the neurons downstream of the
clock network. Most synaptic output from the clock network
is directed to intrinsic brain neurons, and in particular, the
central brain neurons (Figure 4A-C). Except for l-LNv, all
clock clusters have a majority of their output onto central
brain neurons. l-LNv mostly provide inputs to Medullary
intrinsic neurons in the optic lobe (Mi 1, Figure 4B-C),
consistent with their role in adapting the sensitivity of the
visual system to the time of day (Chen et al., 1992, Pyza and
Meinertzhagen, 1997). Further, the majority of the output
from DN1pA is onto visual projecting and central brain
neurons that are part of the clock network (LNITP, s-
CPDN3C/D, Figure 4B). After broadly classifying clock
outputs, we next focused on specific cell types which receive
the strongest synaptic inputs (>49 synapses) from clock
neurons using an approach similar to the one used earlier
for clock inputs. Our analysis identified the enigmatic
Clamp neurons (Figure 4D), which receive strong synaptic
inputs from APDN3. While the functions of most of these
clamp neurons are still unknown, some of them output onto
descending neurons, while others promote sleep (Sun et al.,
2022). Moreover, DN1pB provide strong inputs to Tubercleinnervating
neurons (Figure 4E), which are part of the
anterior visual pathway (Hulse et al., 2021). Lastly, several
clock neurons are strongly connected to diverse neurons
from different neuropil regions (Figure 4F).
Next, we examined clock inputs to descending neurons
which could influence locomotor and other behaviors
regulated by neurons in the ventral nerve cord. Interestingly,
clock neurons provide direct inputs to 18 descending
neurons (Figure 4A and G). These descending neurons
include those which have not yet been classified (Figure 4H),
as well as Allatostatin-C (AstC) and SIFamine (SIFa)
peptidergic neurons (Figure 4I), the latter of which
modulate feeding, mating, and sleep (Nässel and Zandawala,
2022). Direct synaptic inputs to downstream descending
neurons predominantly derive from s-CPDN3A-D, and LPN
(Figure 4B). When considering disynaptic connections, the
connectivity between the clock network and descending
neurons increased drastically, with approximately 24% of all
descending neurons receiving indirect inputs from most of
the clock neurons (Figure 4G). In summary, our
connectivity analysis indicates that the clock can have a
major influence on diverse behaviors, including locomotion,
via outputs to descending neurons.
In addition, the circadian clock is also known to modulate
behaviors such as activity/sleep, spatial orientation, and
learning and memory (Beer and Helfrich-Förster, 2020,
Flyer-Adams et al., 2020). These behaviors are regulated by
higher brain centers such as the central complex and
mushroom bodies. Consistent with previous results
(Reinhard et al., 2022a, Reinhard et al., 2022b), we found few
direct connections from the clock to neurons associated with
the central complex (Figure 4J) and mushroom bodies
(Figure 4K). Consequently, we predicted that the clock
output to these higher coordination centers is either indirect
or paracrine via neuropeptides. In line with this prediction,
we found prominent disynaptic connectivity between clock
neurons and central complex neurons (mainly fan-shaped
body (FB) and ellipsoid body neurons (EB)), as well as
between clock neurons and Kenyon cells (KC),
dopaminergic neurons (DANs) and mushroom body output
neurons (MBONs) (Figure 4J-K). In support of paracrine
signaling, receptors for several clock neuropeptides are also
enriched in higher brain centers (Nässel and Zandawala,
2019). Taken together, circadian modulation of neurons
regulating diverse behaviors is largely indirect or paracrine.
Similarly, we observed very few direct connections between
clock neurons and endocrine cells which influence
organismal physiology and systemic homeostasis (Figure
4A-B). We address this connectivity in more detail below.
Identification and characterization of the neuroendocrine
center in the FlyWire connectome
While recent work has unraveled some clock output
pathways to endocrine cells, our collective understanding of
the circadian regulation of endocrine rhythms is poor (Nagy
et al., 2019, Barber et al., 2021, Hidalgo et al., 2023). To
address this knowledge gap, we first identified and classified
all endocrine or NSC in the brain which are a major source
of circulating hormones. These endocrine cells can be
broadly classified into lateral, medial, and subesophageal
zone NSC (l-NSC, m-NSC, and SEZ-NSC, respectively) based
on their location in the brain. Their axons exit the brain via
a pair of nerves (nervii corpora cardiaca, NCC), and
depending on the cell type, innervate the corpora cardiaca,
corpora allata, hypocerebral ganglion, crop, aorta, or the
anterior midgut (Figure 5A). Their axon terminals form
neurohemal sites through which hormones are released into
the circulation or locally on peripheral targets such as the
crop. Collectively, the NSC form a major, yet distributed,
neuroendocrine center that is functionally analogous to the
hypothalamus (Nässel and Zandawala, 2020). We identified
all brain NSC in the FlyWire connectome by isolating the
nerve bundle containing their axons (Figure 5B-C). In total,
we independently identified 80 brain NSC (Supplementary
Video 4), in agreement with our companion studies
(Dorkenwald et al., 2023, Schlegel et al., 2023). We propose
and utilize a systematic nomenclature for all brain NSC
based on their location and neuropeptide identity (Table 2).
While all adult SEZ-NSC and some l-NSC can easily be
classified based on their morphology and location (Figure
5B-C), this approach is not feasible for m-NSC since they are
clustered together in the superior medial protocerebrum and
appear similar based on gross morphology. Therefore, we
asked whether cosine similarity-based clustering, such as
the one used previously for clock neurons, can be used to
distinguish and identify different m-NSC clusters, as well as
the l-NSCCRZ cluster. As expected, SEZ-NSCHugin, SEZNSCCapa,
and l-NSCDH31 form three separate clusters (Figure
S13A-C). Most l-NSCITP (Figure S13B) do not have any input
synapses in our dataset and were thus excluded from this
analysis. Notably, this analysis resulted in two clusters of m-
NSC comprising 4 and 6 neurons each. Hence, these clusters
likely represent m-NSCDMS and m-NSCDH44, respectively
(Figure S13A and D). We obtained two additional clusters of
m-NSC comprising 18 and 12 neurons, with the latter having
low similarity between the neurons. The cluster comprising
18 m-NSC represents IPCs (m-NSCDILP). Whether all cells in
this cluster express DILP2,3 and 5 remains unknown;
however, DILP2 is expressed in more than 14 neurons in
adults (Ohhara et al., 2018).
Interestingly, we could only reliably identify 6 out of the
expected 14 l-NSCCRZ (Figure S13B and Table 2). These 6
neurons cluster into two separate clades (Figure S13A) as
they represent a heterogenous population both anatomically
and functionally (Oh et al., 2019, Zandawala et al., 2021).
Our inability to identify the remaining 8 CRZ neurons
inspired us to examine if these adult-specific CRZ neurons
are indeed neurosecretory. Using Gr64a-Gal4 to label the
adult-specific CRZ neurons (Fujii et al., 2015), we showed
that there are only 6 adult l-NSCCRZ (Figure S14). Contrary to
our expectation, the adult-specific CRZ neurons do not
project via the NCC and are thus not endocrine. Hence, our
clustering analysis accounts for all the NSC that persist into
adulthood. Additionally, it uncovered 12 putative m-NSC
and 14 putative l-NSC in the adult brain (Figure 5D, S13E,
Supplementary Video 5). These neurons have smaller
somata compared to other identified NSC (Figure S13) and
have relatively fewer dense core vesicles than neurons such
as l-NSCITP (data not shown). Hence, the type (neuropeptide,
biogenic amine, or fast-acting neurotransmitter) and the
identity of the signaling molecules within these neurons
remain unknown.
Informed by these new insights on different subgroups of
NSC, we first explored potential inputs from clock neurons.
Intriguingly, we observed sparse direct inputs from clock
neurons to most NSC (Figure 5E), despite clock neuron
projections being closely associated with NSC dendrites in
the superior medial and lateral protocerebrum. The only
exceptions are l-NSCDH31 which receive inputs from LNITP
and s-CPDN3B. (Figure 5F). This observation prompted us to
examine other types of synaptic inputs to NSC to ensure that
the lack of synaptic connectivity between the clock network
and NSC was not due to false negatives. Consistent with the
location of m-NSC dendrites in the tritocerebrum (King et
al., 2017, Zandawala et al., 2018), a large portion of their
inputs derive from central, ascending and sensory neurons
(Figure 5G). Therefore, a lack of direct clock output to the
NSC is genuine, and this connectivity is likely indirect or
paracrine in nature. To explore the extent of indirect
connections, we examined disynaptic connectivity between
clock neurons and NSC. Approximately 43% of the clock
neurons provide inputs to half of the NSC disynaptically.
The interneurons which facilitate these connections mainly
include central neurons (Figure 5G and H) and descending
neurons (Figure 5I). Taken together, these prominent
indirect connections between the clock network and NSC
could form the basis of circadian regulation of systemic
physiology.
Identifying the molecular basis of paracrine clock output
pathways
Given the large repertoire of neuropeptides previously
shown to be expressed in clock neurons (Abruzzi et al., 2017,
Ma et al., 2021, Ma et al., 2023), we predicted that peptidergic
combined with immunohistochemical localization and T2AGal4
lines. Unsupervised clustering of all clock neuron
transcriptomes using t-SNE analysis yields 32 independent
clusters (data not shown), 16 of which have high expression
of clock genes (tim and Clk) and can be reliably identified
based on known markers (Figure 6A-B). Our analysis
revealed that most clock clusters express at least one
neuropeptide (Figure 6B). Consistent with previous studies,
l-LNv express high levels of Pdf, whereas s-LNv express both
Pdf and short neuropeptide F (sNPF) (Figure 6B). Similar
coexpression of neuropeptides is also observed in other
clusters including the “DN1p
CNMa & AstC” cluster which
coexpresses CNMamide (CNMa), AstC, and Dh31
neuropeptides. In total, at least 12 neuropeptides are highly
expressed in the clock network (Figure 6B-C). Importantly,
this includes novel clock-related neuropeptides, namely
DH44 and Proctolin (Proc). Dh44 is expressed in several
clock clusters including DN1a, DN1p
AstA, DN1p
sNPF, DN3
VGlut,
LPN and LNd
NPF (Figure 6B-C). We independently confirmed
the presence of DH44 peptide in these clusters using a
combination of DH44 antibody or DH44-T2A-Gal4 (Figure
6D, S15, and S16). Proc, on the other hand, is strongly
expressed in the DN1p
CNMa and weakly in DN2 clusters which
was verified by driving GFP using a Proc-T2A-LexA driver
(Figure 6E and S15). Proc expression in other clock clusters
such as LNd
NPF and DN3
VGlut, remains to be validated. Lastly,
we also detected AstC expression in additional clock
neurons. AstC immunoreactivity was previously localized in
DN1p, DN3, and LPN (Diaz et al., 2019, Reinhard et al.,
2022a), which is in agreement with AstC transcript
expression in DN1p
Rh7 and DN1p
CNMa & AstC clusters (Figure 6BC).
Here, we show that AstC is additionally expressed in
DN2, which were labeled using an antibody against VRI
(Figure 6B, 6F, S15, and S16). Our expression analyses
revealed the comprehensive neuropeptide complement of
clock neurons (Figure 6B-F, S15, and S16) and provides the
basis to explore paracrine targets of clock neurons.
As a first step in this direction and to validate our approach,
we focused on select NSC which have been extensively
characterized previously. We predicted that NSC are
targeted by clock-related neuropeptides since they receive
sparse monosynaptic inputs from clock neurons despite
being closely associated with them anatomically. To
investigate potential paracrine signaling between clock
neurons and NSC, we again turned our attention to singlecell
transcriptomics. We identified single-cell RNA
transcriptomes of m-NSCDH44, m-NSCDILP, l-NSCCRZ, l-
NSCDH31, and l-NSCITP (Davie et al., 2018) based on
previously identified markers, and quantified the expression
of clock peptide receptors (Figure 6G). We could not reliably
mine m-NSCDMS due to the lack of multiple molecular
markers. We also disregarded SEZ-NSCCapa and SEZNSCHugin
from this analysis since they are much further away
from clock neuron projections. Consistent with our
prediction, our analysis indicated that multiple receptors for
clock peptides are indeed expressed in NSC. Modulatory
inputs to m-NSCDILP have been examined extensively and
our analysis is in agreement with previous expression and
functional studies (Kapan et al., 2012, Nässel and Vanden
Broeck, 2016, Nagy et al., 2019, Oh et al., 2019, Held et al.,
2023). Taken together, our analysis uncovers the molecular
substrates of paracrine signaling between clock neurons and
NSC.
We next explored the magnitude of peptidergic paracrine
signaling between clock neurons themselves. To predict
putative paracrine connections, we extensively mapped the
expression of clock neuropeptide receptors within the clock
network. Consistent with promoter and genomic fragmentbased
Pdfr-Gal4 expression (Im and Taghert, 2010), Pdf
receptor (Pdfr) transcript is highly enriched in most clock
clusters (Figure 7A-B), which we verified independently by
expressing GFP using Pdfr[RA]-T2A-Gal4 (Figure 7C and
D). Other receptors are more sparsely expressed within the
clock network (Figure 7A-B). However, most clock clusters
express at least two receptors, with DN1p
sNPF expressing at
least 7 receptors. We validated our single-cell transcriptome
analysis by mapping the expression of select receptors using
T2A-Gal4 knock-in lines. Our anatomical mapping of
receptors (Figure 7D and S17) is largely in agreement with
transcriptome data. In some cases, however, receptor
mapping can provide additional insights. For instance, there
are four transcript variants (A, B, C, and D) encoding the
Drosophila Neuropeptide F receptor (NPFR). Using Gal4
lines specific for NPFR-A/C and NPFR-B/D isoforms, we
showed that these isoforms are differentially expressed
across the clock clusters, with A/C isoforms expressed more
broadly than B/D isoforms (Figure 7D and S17).
Finally, we utilized our expression data of neuropeptides
and their cognate receptors in clock neurons to delineate
putative paracrine signaling pathways within the network.
For this, we utilized an approach (Figure S18) similar to the
one used recently to predict the Caenorhabditis elegans
neuropeptide connectome (Ripoll-Sanchez et al., 2023).
Briefly, we used expression data based on independent
methods to conservatively localize the expression of
neuropeptides and their receptors across all the clock
clusters. We also utilized the connectome to factor in the
distance between neurons of different clusters. This was
done to ensure that the cells releasing the peptide and those
expressing its receptor are not further apart than a cut-off of
14μm, which was set based on a previous paracrine connectivity
study (Nagy et al., 2019). Lastly, we only considered
strong peptide-receptor interactions by disregarding ligands
with EC50 values for receptor activation higher than 500nM.
This stringent in silico approach allowed us to predict
paracrine connectivity within the clock network with high
confidence. Taking s-LNv as an example, this cluster
expresses both PDF and sNPF. Following our expression
thresholding, PDFR is expressed in most clock clusters,
whereas sNPF receptor is expressed in DN1p, DN3, LPN and
l-LNv (Figure 7 and S18). Thus, in addition to providing
synaptic inputs to DN3, s-LNv can potentially provide
paracrine inputs to most clock clusters across both
hemispheres (Figure 7E). Connectivity from l-LNv is also
enhanced by paracrine signaling, although not to the same
extent as it is for s-LNv. Expanding this analysis to other
clock clusters allowed us to comprehensively identify
putative peptidergic signaling pathways between clock
clusters (Figure 7E). These pathways, however, can only be
considered putative for three main reasons: (1) all clock
neuropeptides are also expressed in other non-clock neurons
(Nässel and Zandawala, 2019), suggesting likely inputs from
neurons extrinsic to the clock network, (2) we don’t account
for peptide efficacies and receptor affinities since these
values were independently determined in distinct systems
thus making comparisons difficult and (3) despite our best
efforts to account for it, distance of peptide diffusion may
vary. Nonetheless, the presence of receptors for clock
peptides in other clock neurons provides the molecular basis
for potential paracrine signaling between them. In
summary, peptidergic signaling greatly enriches the
connectivity between different subsets of clock neurons.
Additional investigations are necessary to determine which
of these putative connections are functional in vivo.
Discussion
Peptidergic signaling supplements synaptic connectivity
within the circadian clock network
Using a multipronged approach centered around the Fly-
Wire connectome (Dorkenwald et al., 2023, Schlegel et al.,
2023), we describe the first whole-brain neural connectome
of an animal circadian clock. Our analysis using the complete
brain connectome eluded identification of one DN2,
and a couple of s-CPDN3. Nevertheless, given the fact that
we identified almost all of the expected clock neurons as well
as several additional DN3 (Table 1), our clock neuron synaptic
wiring diagram is complete enough to be regarded as a
connectome. Our clock connectome is also a significant upgrade
(10-fold larger numerically) compared to the partial
connectivity diagram based on the hemibrain connectome
reported earlier (Shafer et al., 2022). The previous analysis
was based on only 24 clock neurons and largely focused on
LN clusters, while excluding l-LNv, and several DN1p, DN2,
and DN3 clusters due to the incomplete nature of the dataset.
However, as evident from our analysis here, the DN in fact
represent an important hub in the clock network and display
high synaptic connectivity. In particular, DN1p play a large
role in clock cluster interconnectivity and DN3 appear important
for clock output pathways. Our analysis also sheds
light on the precise number of DN3 in the clock network. Although
approximately 80 DN3 were previously estimated in
the entire clock network, there are in total about 170 DN3
based on our connectome and anatomical analyses. We anticipate
that resources such as NeuronBridge (Meissner et
al., 2023), which allow for comparisons between electron
and light microscopy datasets, will facilitate the identification
of Gal4 drivers that target the novel s-CPDN3 subtypes
identified here. In addition, we also characterized the molecular
basis for neuropeptide connectivity between the clock
neurons, consequently highlighting putative peptidergic
pathways within the clock network. Similar to vertebrates
(Wen et al., 2020, Morris et al., 2021), the Drosophila clock
network is highly peptidergic, with all clock neuron clusters
expressing at least one neuropeptide. Notably, a majority of
the clock clusters express two neuropeptides, and several express
three, while the LPN express four neuropeptides. Similar
neuropeptide coexpression is also evident in SCN
neurons and thus appears to be a common feature of clock
neurons (Wen et al., 2020). Surprisingly, there is little to no
overlap in the neuropeptide complement of the Drosophila
and vertebrate clock neurons (Figure 8). Orthologs of vertebrate
clock neuropeptides including vasoactive intestinal
peptide, arginine vasopressin, neuromedin S, cholecystokinin,
gastrin-releasing peptide, and prokineticin 2 are either
absent in the Drosophila genome or expressed outside
the clock network. Hence, Drosophila and vertebrates have
evolved to utilize different signaling molecules while still
conserving the diversity of neuropeptide signaling within
the clock networks. Remarkably, except for PDF, there appears
to be little conservation in neuropeptide identities of
clock neurons across different insects (Stengl and Arendt,
2016, Beer and Helfrich-Förster, 2020). This suggests that it
is more important to conserve the mode of communication
(paracrine signaling) rather than the messenger (specific
neuropeptide).
Contralateral connectivity within the network prevents decoupling
of clock neurons across the hemispheres
Analysis of interconnectivity within the clock network
revealed extensive contralateral synaptic connectivity
between the clock neurons, which is largely mediated by
DN1pA and to a lesser extent by s-CPDN3C, s-CPDN3D, l-
CPDN3, and LNITP. Furthermore, paracrine peptidergic
signaling amongst clock neurons has the potential to further
strengthen this contralateral connectivity. Such a strong
bilateral coupling of clock neurons prevents the internal
two hemispheres – a phenomenon that can happen in other
insects and even in mammals, but so far has not been
observed in fruit flies (Helfrich-Förster, 2004). In addition,
consistent with previous analysis using the hemibrain
connectome (Shafer et al., 2022), we did not observe any
synaptic connectivity between the s-LNv and the LNd
neurons, which control morning and evening activities,
respectively. In line with this observation, the phase
relationship between morning and evening oscillators is
plastic, consequently facilitating seasonal adaptations as in
mammals (Yoshii et al., 2012). Our data may also explain
how the morning and evening oscillators in flies internally
desynchronize under certain conditions (Helfrich-Förster,
2014). One such relevant condition is increased PDF
signaling during long days (Hidalgo et al., 2023), which was
shown to delay the evening oscillators (Liang et al., 2016,
Liang et al., 2017, Vaze and Helfrich-Förster, 2021) and may
lead to internal desynchronization (Wulbeck et al., 2008).
Here, we confirm the presence of PDFR in the evening
neurons. Thus, enhanced PDF signaling could delay the
evening neurons and bring them out of phase with the
morning neurons, especially because the two sets of neurons
are not connected via synapses. Taken together, the lack of
interconnectivity between s-LNv and LNd could potentially
be a factor promoting adaptation to different seasons and
contexts.
Light and other inputs to Drosophila and vertebrate circadian
clocks
Our analyses reveal that extrinsic light input from the
photoreceptor cells of the compound eyes, HB eyelets, and
ocelli to the clock neurons is largely indirect, with the former
two transmitting light inputs via aMe neurons. This
situation may appear to be different from mammals where
intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cells in the
retina project directly through the retinohypothalamic tract
onto the SCN neurons (Figure 8) (Starnes and Jones, 2023).
However, even the mammalian clock receives indirect
photoreceptor inputs from rods and cones via bipolar cells
and retinal ganglion cells. Furthermore, indirect light inputs
may reach the SCN also via the intergeniculate leaflets of the
thalamus (Kim and Harrington, 2008). Altogether, this
suggests that the fly and mammalian system are not
fundamentally different. One apparent difference is the
presence of CRY, a cell-autonomous circadian
photoreceptor, in subsets of Drosophila clock neurons that is
sufficient for light entrainment in eyeless mutants (Helfrich-
Förster et al., 2001). Mammals lack light-sensitive CRY.
Instead, they possess light-sensitive melanopsin in retinal
ganglion cells, and mice lacking rods and cones can still
entrain to light/dark cycles due to melanopsin (Foster et al.,
2020). Thus, flies and mice possess several redundant and
partly parallel light-input pathways to entrain their clocks.
The similarity is even higher when comparing flies with
vertebrates in general. For instance, fish, birds, and reptiles
possess additional photoreceptors in the pineal gland, which
is reminiscent of the extraretinal HB eyelets or even the
ocelli of flies (Figure 8). Most importantly, vertebrates and
flies use their eyes for both vision and entraining their
circadian clocks, tasks that require completely different
properties of light inputs. Vision requires image formation
and fast neurotransmission, whereas circadian entrainment
is dependent on integrating light collection over a longer
time that can be at a slower rate. The connectome reveals
that the number of synapses as well as the axon thickness of
the neurons mediating this connectivity are very different
between the two types of photoreception. Hence, they are
aptly suited to perform their required functions.
Paracrine modulation of the neuroendocrine system by circadian
clock
Since circadian control of organismal physiology is likely
mediated via hormones, in parallel with the clock
connectome, we also identified the cells that make up the
neurosecretory center of an adult Drosophila brain. This
neurosecretory center is comprised of 80 endocrine cells,
located in distinct regions of the brain and having unique
neuropeptide identities. Neurosecretory connectomes of
larval Drosophila and the marine annelid, Platynereis
dumerilii have been established previously (Williams et al.,
2017, Huckesfeld et al., 2021). Unfortunately, these studies
did not examine the connectivity between the circadian
clock and the neuroendocrine centers. Thus, it remains to be
seen whether the largely indirect and paracrine signaling
between the adult Drosophila circadian network and NSC is
a phenomenon conserved across other animals. However,
given the relatively slow timescales at which the circadian
output needs to be propagated to downstream neurons,
neuropeptides seem suited for this role.
Limitations of our approach
The novel synaptic and putative paracrine connections
reported here can only be considered predictions until they
are functionally verified. In the case of paracrine
connectivity, functional connectivity experiments (in
normal and peptide mutant flies) using electrophysiological
methods or genetically encoded secondary messenger
sensors (calcium and cAMP) are needed to confidently
establish functional paracrine connectivity. Additionally,
the synaptic connectivity reported here is likely an
underestimation due to several factors: 1) we did not explore
connectivity via gap junctions, 2) approximately 30% of
synapses are missing for photoreceptors (Dorkenwald et al.,
2023) and 3) we generally used a connectivity threshold of
>4 synapses. Preliminary expression analysis using the
single-cell transcriptomes of clock neurons suggests that gap
junction genes are enriched in the clock network (data not
shown) and they can influence activity-rest rhythms
(Ramakrishnan and Sheeba, 2021). It remains to be seen
which clock neurons are additionally coupled via gap
junctions and how this electrical connectivity complements
synaptic and peptidergic connectivity detailed here.
Moreover, as discussed earlier, fewer than 5 synapses could
also represent functional connections which were largely
disregarded in our analyses. While the FlyWire and
hemibrain connectomes exhibit a high degree of stereotypy,
they are both based on an adult female brain. The lack of a
male brain connectome currently prevents any comparisons
on sex-specific differences within the circadian network and
its output pathways which could influence sexually
dimorphic behaviors and physiology. Further, the
connectome provides a singular snapshot of connectivity
which could change depending on the time of day, the age of
the animal as well as its internal state.
Conclusion
In conclusion, our circadian clock connectome, the first of
its magnitude, is a significant milestone in chronobiology.
Given the high conservation of circadian network motifs
between Drosophila and vertebrates, this connectome
provides the framework to systematically investigate
circadian dysregulation which is linked to various health
issues in humans including sleep, metabolic, and mood
disorders. Moreover, it will also facilitate the development
and experimental validation of novel hypotheses on clock
function.