The three pounds of jelly-like material found within our skulls is the most complex machine on Earth and perhaps the universe. Its phenomenal features would not be possible without the hundreds of billions of neurons that make it up, and, importantly, the connections between those neurons.  Fortunately, much is known about the properties of individual neurons and simple neuronal networks, and aspects of complex neuronal networks are beginning to be unraveled.  This chapter will begin with a discussion of the neuron, the elementary node or element of the brain, and then move to a discussion of the ways in which individual neurons communicate with each other.  What makes the nervous system such a fantastic device and distinguishes the brain from other organs of the body is not that it has 100 billion neurons, but that nerve cells are capable of communicating with each other in such a highly structured manner as to form neuronal networks.  To understand neural networks, it is necessary to understand the ways in which one neuron communicates with another through synaptic connections and the process called synaptic transmission.  Synaptic transmission comes in two basic flavors: excitation and inhibition.  Just a few interconnected neurons (a microcircuit) can perform sophisticated tasks such as mediate reflexes, process sensory information, generate locomotion and mediate learning and memory.  More complex networks (macrocircuits) consist of multiple imbedded microcircuits.  Macrocircuits mediate higher brain functions such as object recognition and cognition.  So, multiple levels of networks are ubiquitous in the nervous system.  Networks are also prevalent within neurons.  These nanocircuits constitute the underlying biochemical machinery for mediating key neuronal properties such as learning and memory and the genesis of neuronal rhythmicity.
The 100 billion neurons in the brain share a number of common features (Figure 1).  Neurons are different from most other cells in the body in that they are polarized and have distinct morphological regions, each with specific functions.  Dendrites are the region where one neuron receives connections from other neurons.  The cell body or soma contains the nucleus and the other organelles necessary for cellular function.  The axon is a key component of nerve cells over which information is transmitted from one part of the neuron (e.g., the cell body) to the terminal regions of the neuron.  Axons can be rather long extending up to a meter or so in some human sensory and motor nerve cells.  The synapse is the terminal region of the axon and it is here where one neuron forms a connection with another and conveys information through the process of synaptic transmission.  The aqua-colored neuron in Figure 1 (click on "Neuron Connected to a Postsynaptic Neuron") is referred to as the postsynaptic neuron.  The tan-colored terminal to the left is consequently referred to as the presynaptic neuron.  One neuron can receive contacts from many different neurons.  Figure 1 (click on "Neuron Receiving Synaptic Input") shows an example of three presynaptic neurons contacting the one tan-colored postsynaptic neuron, but it has been estimated that one neuron can receive contacts from up to 10,000 other cells.  Consequently, the potential complexity of the networks is vast.  Similarly, any one neuron can contact up to 10,000 postsynaptic cells.  (Note that the tan-colored neuron that was presynaptic to the aqua-colored neuron is postsynaptic to the pink, green, and blue neurons.  So most “presynaptic” neurons are “postsynaptic” to some other neuron(s).
Figure 1 (click on "The Synapse") also shows an expanded view of the synapse.  Note that the presynaptic cell is not directly connected to the postsynaptic cell.  The two are separated by a gap known as the synaptic cleft.  Therefore, to communicate with the postsynaptic cell, the presynaptic neuron needs to release a chemical messenger.  That messenger is found within the neurotransmitter-containing vesicles (the blue dots represent the neurotransmitter).  An action potential that invades the presynaptic terminal causes these vesicles to fuse with the inner surface of the presynaptic membrane and release their contents through a process called exocytosis.  The released transmitter diffuses across the gap between the pre- and the postsynaptic cell and very rapidly reaches the postsynaptic side of the synapse where it binds to specialized receptors that “recognize” the transmitter.  The binding to the receptors leads to a change in the permeability of ion channels in the membrane and in turn a change in the membrane potential of the postsynaptic neuron known as a postsynaptic synaptic potential (PSP).  So signaling among neurons is associated with changes in the electrical properties of neurons.  To understand neurons and neuronal circuits, it is necessary to understand the electrical properties of nerve cells.
Resting potentials. Figure 2 shows an example of an idealized nerve cell.  Placed in the extracellular medium is a microelectrode.  A microelectrode is nothing more than a small piece of glass capillary tubing that is stretched under heat to produce a very fine tip, on the order of 1 micron in diameter.  The microelectrode is filled with a conducting solution and then connected to a suitable recording device such as an oscilloscope or chart recorder.  With the electrode outside the cell in the extracellular medium, zero potential is recorded because the extracellular medium is isopotential.  If, however, the electrode penetrates the cell such that the tip of the electrode is now inside the cell, a sharp deflection is seen on the recording device.  A potential of about -60 millivolts inside negative with respect to the outside is recorded.  This potential is called the resting potential and is constant for indefinite periods of time in the absence of any stimulation.  If the electrode is removed, a potential of zero is recorded again.  Resting potentials are not just characteristics of nerve cells; all cells in the body have resting potentials.  What distinguishes nerve cells and other excitable membranes (e.g.,  muscle cells) is that they are capable of changing their resting potential.  In the case of nerve cells, for integrating information and transmitting information, whereas, in the case of muscle cells, for producing muscle contractions. 
Action potentials. Figure 3 shows another sketch of an idealized neuron.  This neuron has been impaled with one electrode to measure the resting potential and a second electrode called the stimulating electrode.  The stimulating electrode is connected through a switch to a battery.  If the battery is oriented such that the positive pole is connected to the switch, closing the switch will make the inside of the cell somewhat more positive depending upon the size of the battery.  (Such a decrease in the polarized state of a membrane is called a depolarization.)  Figure 3 is an animation in which the switch is repeatedly opened and closed and each time it is closed a larger battery is applied to the circuit.  Initially, the switch closure produces only small depolarizations.  However, the potentials become larger and eventually the depolarization is sufficiently large to trigger an action potential, also known as a spike or an impulse.  The action potential is associated with a very rapid depolarization to achieve a peak value of about +40 mV in just 0.5 milliseconds (msec).  The peak is followed by an equally rapid repolarization phase.
The voltage at which the depolarization becomes sufficient to trigger an action potential is called the threshold.  If a larger battery is used to generate a suprathreshold depolarization, a single action potential is still generated and the amplitude of that action potential is the same as the action potential trigged by a just-threshold stimulus.  The simple recording in Figure 3 illustrates two very important features of action potentials.  First, they are elicited in an all-or-nothing fashion.  Either an action potential is elicited with stimuli at or above threshold, or an action potential is not elicited.  Second, action potentials are very brief events of only about several milliseconds in duration.  Initiating an action potential is somewhat analogous to applying match to a fuse.  A certain temperature is needed to ignite the fuse (i.e., the fuse has a threshold).  A match that generates a greater amount of heat than the threshold temperature will not cause the fuse to burn any brighter or faster.  Just as action potentials are elicited in an all-or-nothing fashion, they are also propagated in an all-or-nothing fashion.  Once an action potential is initiated in one region of a neuron such as the cell body, that action potential will propagate along the axon (like a burning fuse) and ultimately invade the synapse where it can initiate the process of synaptic transmission.
In the example in Figure 3, only a single action potential was generated because the duration of each of the two suprathreshold stimuli was so brief that sufficient time was only available to initiate a single action potential (i.e., the stimulus ended before the action potential completed its depolarization-repolarization cycle).  But, as shown in the animations of Figure 4, longer-duration stimuli can lead to the initiation of multiple action potentials, the frequency of which is dependent on the intensity of the stimulus. Therefore, it is evident that the nervous system encodes information not in terms of the changes in the amplitude of action potentials, but rather in their frequency.  This is a very universal property.  The greater the intensity of a mechanical stimulus to a touch receptor, the greater the number of action potentials; the greater the amount of stretch to a muscle stretch receptor, the greater the number of action potentials; the greater the intensity of a light, the greater the number of action potentials that is transmitted to the central nervous system.  Similarly, in the motor system, the greater the number of action potentials in a motor neuron, the greater will be the contraction of the muscle that receives a synaptic connection from that motor neuron.  Engineers call this type of information coding pulse frequency modulation.
Figure 5 illustrates three neurons.  The one colored green will be referred to as an excitatory neuron for reasons that will become clear shortly.  It makes a connection to the postsynaptic neuron colored blue.  The traces below (press "Play") illustrate the consequences of initiating an action potential in the green neuron.  That action potential in the presynaptic neuron leads to a decrease in the membrane potential of the postsynaptic cell.  The membrane potential changes from its resting value of about -60 millivolts to a more depolarized state.  This potential is called an excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP).  It is “excitatory” because it moves the membrane potential toward the threshold and it is “postsynaptic” because it is a potential recorded on the postsynaptic side of the synapse.  Generally (and this is an important point), a single action potential in a presynaptic cell does not produce an EPSP large enough to reach threshold and trigger an action potential.  But, if multiple action potentials are fired in the presynaptic cell, the corresponding multiple excitatory potentials can summate through a process called temporal summation to reach threshold and triggering an action potential.  EPSPs can be viewed as a “go signal” to the postsynaptic neuron to transmit information through a network pathway.
The red-colored neuron in Figure 5 is referred to as an inhibitory neuron. Like the green neuron, it also makes a synaptic contact with the blue postsynaptic neuron.  It also releases a chemical transmitter messenger, but the consequences of the transmitter from the blue cell binding to receptors on the postsynaptic cell is opposite to the consequences of the transmitter released by the green neuron.  The consequence of action potential in the red presynaptic neuron is to produce an increase in the membrane potential, i.e. a hyperpolarization of the blue postsynaptic neuron.  Therefore the membrane potential is farther away from threshold.  This type of potential is called an inhibitory postsynaptic potential (IPSP) because it tends to prevent the postsynaptic neuron from firing an action potential.  This is a “stop signal” for the postsynaptic cell.  So the green neuron says “go” and the red neuron says “stop”. Now what is the postsynaptic neuron to do?
Neurons are like adding machines.  They are constantly adding up the excitatory and the inhibitory synaptic input in time (temporal summation) and over the area of the dendrites receiving synaptic contacts (spatial summation), and if that summation is at or above threshold they fire an action potential.  If the sum is below threshold, no action potential is initiated.  This is a process called synaptic integration and is illustrated in Figure 5.  Initially, two action potentials in the green neuron produced summating EPSPs that fired an action potential in the blue neuron.  But, if an IPSP from the inhibitory neuron occurs just before two action potentials in the excitatory neuron, the summation of the one IPSP and the two EPSPs is below threshold and no action potential is elicited in the postsynaptic cell.  The inhibitory neuron (and inhibition in general) is a way of gating or regulating the ability of an excitatory signal to fire a postsynaptic cell. 
As indicated earlier in the chapter, a neuron can receive contacts from up to 10,000 presynaptic neurons, and, in turn, any one neuron can contact up to 10,000 postsynaptic neurons.  The combinatorial possibility could give rise to enormously complex neuronal circuits or network topologies, which might be very difficult to understand.  But despite the potential vast complexity, much can be learned about the functioning of neuronal circuits by examining the properties of a subset of simple circuit configurations.  Figure 6 illustrates some of those microcircuit or micronetwork motifs.  Although simple, they can do much of what needs to be done by a nervous system.
Feedforward excitation.  Allows one neuron to relay information to its neighbor.  Long chains of these can be used to propagate information through the nervous system.
Feedforward inhibition.  A presynaptic cell excites an inhibitory interneuron (an interneuron is a neuron interposed between two neurons) and that inhibitory interneuron then inhibits the next follower cell.  This is a way of shutting down or limiting excitation in a downstream neuron in a neural circuit.
Convergence/Divergence.  One postsynaptic cell receives convergent input from a number of different presynaptic cells and any individual neuron can make divergent connections to many different postsynaptic cells.  Divergence allows one neuron to communicate with many other neurons in a network.  Convergence allows a neuron to receive input from many neurons in a network.
Lateral inhibition.  A presynaptic cell excites inhibitory interneurons and they inhibit neighboring cells in the network.  As described in detail later in the Chapter, this type of circuit can be used in sensory systems to provide edge enhancement. 
Feedback/recurrent inhibition.  In Panel E1, a presynaptic cell connects to a postsynaptic cell, and the postsynaptic cell in turn connects to an interneuron, which then inhibits the presynaptic cell.  This circuit can limit excitation in a pathway.  Some initial excitation would be shut off after the red interneuron becomes active.  In Panel E2, each neuron in the closed chain inhibits the neuron to which it is connected.  This circuit would appear to do nothing, but, as will be seen later in the Chapter, it can lead to the generation of complex patterns of spike activity.
Feedback/recurrent excitation.  In Panel F1, a presynaptic neuron excites a postsynaptic neuron and that postsynaptic neuron excites the presynaptic neuron.  This type of circuit can serve a switch-like function because once the presynaptic cell is activated that activation could be perpetuated.  Activation of the presynaptic neuron could switch this network on and it could stay on.  Panel F2 shows variants of feedback excitation in which a presynaptic neuron excites a postsynaptic neuron that can feedback to excite itself (a, an autapse) or other neurons which ultimately feedback (b) to itself.
These simple motifs are ubiquitous components of many neural circuits. Let’s examine some examples of what these networks can do.
One of the best understood microcircuits is the circuit that mediates simple reflex behaviors.  Figure 7 illustrates the circuit for the so-called knee jerk or stretch reflex.  A neurologist strikes the knee with a rubber tapper, which elicits an extension of the leg.  This test is used as a simple way to examine the integrity of some of the sensory and motor pathways in the spinal cord.  The tap of hammer stretches the muscle and leads to the initiation of action potentials in sensory neurons within the muscle that are sensitive to stretch.  (The action potentials are represented by the small bright “lights” in the animation.)  The action potentials are initiated in an all-or-nothing fashion and propagate into the spinal cord where the axon splits (bifurcates) into two branches.
Let’s first discuss the branch to the left that forms a synaptic connection (green triangle) with an Extensor (E) motor neuron (colored blue). The action potential in the sensory neuron invades the synaptic terminal of the sensory neuron causing the release of transmitter and subsequent excitation of the motor neuron.  The stretch to the muscle leads to an action potential in the motor neuron (MN), which then propagates out the peripheral nerve to invade the synapse at the muscle, causing the release of transmitter and an action potential in the muscle.  The action potential in the muscle cell leads to a contraction of the muscle and an extension of the limb.  So, here we have a simple feedforward excitation circuit that mediates a behavior. 
Now let’s examine the right branch of the axon of the sensory neuron of Figure 7.  The action potential in the sensory neuron invades the synaptic terminal of the sensory neuron causing the release of transmitter, and subsequent excitation of the postsynaptic interneuron colored black.  This neuron is called an interneuron because it is interposed between one neuron (here the SN) and another neuron (here the MN).  The excitation of the interneuron leads to the initiation of an action and the subsequent release of transmitter from the presynaptic terminal of the interneuron (black triangle), but for this branch of the circuit, the transmitter leads to an IPSP in the postsynaptic flexor (F) motor neuron (colored red).  The functional consequences of this feedforward inhibition it is to decrease the probability of the flexor motor neuron becoming active and producing an inappropriate flexion of the leg. 
The simplified circuit mediating the stretch reflex is summarized in Figure 8.  However, the proper function of the circuit of the stretch reflex also relies on convergence and divergence.  A single sensory has multiple branches that diverge and make synaptic connections with many individual motor neurons (click on "Divergence").  Therefore, when the muscle contracts as a result of the neurologist’s tapper, it does so because multiple muscle fibers are activated simultaneously by multiple motor neurons.  Also, when the muscle is stretched, not one, but multiple sensory neuron are activated and these sensory neurons all project into the spinal cord where they converge on to individual extensor motor neurons (click on "Convergence").  So, the stretch reflex is due to the combined effects of the activation of multiple sensory neurons and extensor motor neurons.
Edge enhancement.  Lateral inhibition is very important for processing sensory information.  One example is a phenomenon in the visual system called edge enhancement.  Figure 9 illustrates two bands, a dark gray band on the left, and a light gray band on the right.  Although the dark band and the light band are of uniform luminance throughout each field, a close examination reveals that the light gray band appears somewhat lighter at the border of the dark gray band than it is in the other regions of the field.  In contrast, the dark gray band appears somewhat darker at the border than at other regions of the dark field.  This is a phenomenon of edge enhancement, which helps the visual system to extract important information from visual scenes.  Edge enhancement is mediated, at least in part by lateral inhibition in the retina.  
Let’s first consider a circuit without lateral inhibition (Figure 10, click on "Without Lateral Inhibition").  Light falls on the retina (Part A) and the intensity can be described by the step-like gradient (Part B).  As a simplification, assume that the dark gray region has an intensity of five units and the light gray region has an intensity of ten units.  The gradient of light activates the photoreceptors and the photoreceptors make synaptic connections to second-order neurons.  Assume that the light intensity of 5 units leads to 5 spikes/s and the light intensity of 10 units leads to 10 spikes/s (Part C) in the photo receptors, and that the synaptic strength is sufficient (here indicated as +1) so that the light intensity of 5 units leads to 5 spikes/s and the light intensity of 10 units leads to 10 spikes/s (Part C) respectively in the second-order neurons.  If no further processing of the information occurred, the gradient that is perceived would be exactly the same as the gradient of the light intensity (Part B, red trace).  But that is not what is perceived and lateral inhibition explains the difference.
Now consider the expanded circuit with lateral inhibition (click on "With Lateral Inhibition").  Each one of the photoreceptors makes inhibitory synaptic connections with its neighboring second-order neuron.  The strength of the inhibition (denoted by the -0.2) is less than the strength of the excitation (donated by the +1).  Before looking at the border, consider the output of the circuit at the uniform areas of the each field.  Far to the right side of the border all of the cells are receiving the same excitation and the same inhibition.  Without lateral inhibition, the light intensity of 10 units would produce 10 spikes/s in the second-order-neuron.  But because of the inhibitory connection from neighbor neurons to the right and left, the output is reduced to 6 spikes/s.  The same is true for cells far to the left of the border but the magnitude of the excitation is less and correspondingly the magnitude of the inhibition is less.  The key processing occurs at the border or edge.  Note that the neuron just to the right of the border receives the same inhibition from the neuron to its right but receives less inhibition from the neuron to its left on the other side of the border.  Therefore, it receives more net excitation and it has an output of 7 spikes/s rather than the 6 spikes/s of its neighbor to the right.  Now look at the neuron to the left of the border. It receives weak inhibition from its neighbor to the left, but stronger inhibition from its neighbor to the right on the other side of the border. Therefore, it receives less net excitation and it has an output of 2 spikes/s rather than the 3 spikes/s of its neighbor to the left.  So as a result of lateral inhibition the information transmitted to the nervous system and the gradient that is perceived would be a version of the original one with an enhanced border or edge (Figure 10B)!
Mach bands. The simple retinal circuit with lateral inhibition can account the phenomenon of edge enhancement.  It can also account for a visual illusion known as Mach bands.  Figure 11 illustrates a gradient of light and dark vertical bands and across these bands is a thin horizontal line.  It appears as though the horizontal line has an uneven distribution of intensities with it being darker in the region of the light vertical gradients and lighter in the region of the dark vertical gradients.  This is a visual illusion.  The illusion can be revealed by placing a mask over the vertical gradient.  (Press "Play" to add the mask.)  Now you can see that the horizontal bar has uniform intensity.  It is perceived darker in some regions because the cells in the retina that respond to the darker region of the horizontal bar are strongly inhibited by the cells responding to the bright region of the vertical band.  In contrast, the bar is perceived brighter in some regions because the cells in the retina that respond to the lighter region of the horizontal bar are only weakly inhibited by the cells responding to the dark region of the vertical band.
Feedback inhibition in microcircuits.  Feedback inhibition plays a general role in damping excitation through a neural circuit.  A classic example is the Renshaw cell in the spinal cord.  The axon of a spinal motor neuron branches.  One branch innervates muscle as described earlier (e.g., Figure 7) and the other branch makes an excitatory synaptic connection with an interneuron called the Renshaw cell.  The interneuron in turn inhibits the motor neuron, thereby closing the loop.  Another example of feedback inhibition is found in the hippocampus.  CA3-type pyramidal cells make excitatory connections to basket cells and the basket cells feedback to inhibit the CA3 cells.  The term recurrent inhibition is applied to simple feedback inhibition circuits such as the Renshaw circuit in the spinal cord and the basket cell circuit in the hippocampus.
Feedback inhibition in nanocircuits.  Feedback inhibition is not only prevalent in many neuronal circuits; it is also prevalent in biochemical circuits.  Here it can serve as a substrate for generating oscillations.  These can cover multiple time scales from seconds to days depending on the molecular components of the circuit.
Endogenous bursting behavior in neurons.  The idealized neuron described earlier in the Chapter was silent in the absence of stimulation (e.g., Figure 3).  However, some neurons fire action potentials in the absence of stimulation, and, in some cases, the firing patterns can exhibit a bursting pattern in which successive high frequency spike activity is followed by quiescent periods.  Such neuronal properties could be important for generating rhythmic behaviors such as respiration.  Figure 12 is an example of a recording from an invertebrate neuron that has an endogenous bursting rhythm.  This particular neuron is called the parabolic burster because the nature of the inter-spike intervals being long in the beginning and end of the burst cycle, but very brief in the middle of the cycle.  The cell fires a burst of action potentials and then becomes silent, but soon another burst occurs and this process continues indefinitely about every ten to fifteen seconds.  The bursting occurs even if the neuron is surgically removed from the ganglion and placed in culture so there are no synaptic connections from other neurons.  So a neuronal network is not necessary for this rhythm - it is endogenous.  But, it does involve a nanocircuit within the cell.  Figure 13A illustrates a very simplified version of that network that emphasizes the key principle of operation.  Critical for this network function is a channel in the membrane (labeled gSI), which is permeable to Ca2+.  Because the concentration of Ca2+ is relatively high in the extracellular medium and low inside the cell, Ca2+ will move down its concentration gradient and in so doing will depolarize the cell.  Eventually, the depolarization reaches threshold and the cell begins to fire.  The firing leads to additional influx of Ca2+ (green arrow) and accumulation of Ca2+ within the cell.  The key step is that the accumulation of Ca2+ inhibits (red arrow) the further influx of calcium and terminates the burst.  The burst remains terminated as long as the levels of intracellular Ca2+ remain elevated.  But the levels of Ca2+ do not remain elevated for long.  They are reduced by intracellular buffers and removed from the cell by pumps (INaCa and ICaP).  As intracellular levels of Ca2+ are reduced, the inhibition of the channel is removed (disinhibition) and the neuron begins to depolarize again and another burst is initiated.  Essentially, what is seen here at the nanonetwork level is a recapitulation of a feedback inhibitory network (Figure 13B).  An initial excitatory process leads to activation of an inhibitory process, which feeds back to shut off the excitatory process.  In such a network, oscillations will result if the excitatory drive is continuous, but the inhibitory process wanes in its effectiveness.
Circadian rhythms.  A second example of feedback inhibition is the nanocircuit for the gene regulation that underlies circadian rhythms.  The vertebrate circadian rhythm is due to the operation of a group of neurons in a region of the brain called the suprachiasmatic nucleus, which is located just above the optic nerve. Those neurons have profound effects on both hormonal release such as melatonin, cortisol, as well as on autonomic functions such as body temperature (Figure 14). Despite the profound effects of this oscillator, its operation reduces to a very simple circuit, and indeed not a neural circuit, but rather another nanocircuit.  The basic mechanism seems to be conserved across all animal species including man.  Figure 15 is a simplified schematic diagram of the basic components.  Several genes are involved but the core mechanism involves a gene called per, where per is for period.  This gene was first identified from the fruit fly Drosophila but is also present in vertebrates. The per gene leads to the production of per messenger RNA.  The per mRNA leaves the nucleus and enters the cytoplasm where it leads to the synthesis of PER protein.  PER diffuses or is transported back into the nucleus where it represses the further transcription of the per gene. Conceptually, this system is very similar to that of the mechanism for the bursting neuron discussed above.  The gene is activated, it produces the mRNA and the protein, and the protein feedbacks to inhibit the gene expression.  But how does the cycle repeat itself?  The key mechanism is degradation of the PER.   PER protein is degraded and it is degraded over a 24 hour period.  So as the PER protein is degraded the inhibition or repression is removed (disinhibition) allowing this gene to start making messenger RNA and protein all over again.  So once this cycle begins, it is repeated over and over again at a 24 hour period.  This is the core mechanism underlying circadian rhythms and the powerful affects that they have on a number of different physiological systems.  Basically, our circadian rhythms all start with a molecular feedback inhibition network. 
Feedback inhibition in ring circuits.  Recurrent inhibition can, at least in principle, explain the generation of complex motor patters, an example of which is quadrupedal locomotion.  Quadrupedal location is interesting because quadrupeds are capable of not only moving their four legs, but generating different types of cycles of activity called gaits. Figure 16 illustrates four gaits.  The first panel is a walk (tap on the dog).  The sequence begins with extension of the left front limb.  This is followed by extensions of the right hind limb, the right front limb and the left hind limb.  In the trot (second panel of Figure 16) (tap on the dog), the left front and right hind limbs are in phase with each other and 180 degrees out of phase with the right front and left hind limbs. In the bound (third panel) (tap on the dog) the left front and right front limbs are in phase, but 180 degrees out of phase with the left hind and rear hind limbs.  The gallop (fourth panel) (tap on the dog) is a variant of the bound in which there is a slight phase difference between the right and left front limbs and rear limbs.
How does the nervous system generate these gaits?  And, are separate neuronal circuits necessary for each one?  Unfortunately, neuroscientists do not know the answers to these questions, but it is instructive to examine some possibilities.  This is an approach in a field of neuroscience called Computational and Theoretical Neuroscience. One way to generate a gait is illustrated in Figure 17.  Take four individual neurons each with endogenous bursting activity like the one illustrated previously in Figure 12, and assign activity in each one of these neurons to the control of a specific limb.  The neurons could be “started” so that they have the appropriate phase relationships to generate a gait such as the bound illustrated in Figure 16.  The difficulty would be in starting the neurons at exactly the precise time.  Another problem would be slight “drifts” in the oscillatory periods of the four independent neurons that over time would cause the pattern to become uncoordinated (Figure 18).  This dog is not going to win any races and it is probably not going to be able to walk.
So clearly the neurons need to be coupled.  One way of doing this is to use a recurrent inhibition circuit consisting of four coupled neurons to form a so called “ring” circuit where each neuron in the circuit has endogenous bursting activity and each neuron is coupled to the next with an inhibitory synaptic connection (Figure 19A).
To obtain the correct phase relationships for gaits, rather than assigning Neuron 3 to be the right front, it is assigned to control the right hind limb, and Neuron 4 is assigned to control the right front limb (a simple twist of the circuit) (Figure 19B).  When implemented with a computer simulation, this single circuit is capable of generating quadrupedal gates.  Moreover, the same circuit, with just small changes in the properties of the individual neurons, can generate each of the four gaits illustrated in Figure 17 (Figure 20).  
This result indicates an important point about neural networks.  In order to understand them it is necessary to understand not just the topology of the network, but also the nature of the connections between the neurons (whether they are excitatory or inhibitory), as well as the properties of the individual nodes (i.e., the neurons).  Also, this simulation illustrates a phenomenon called dynamic reconfiguration.  It is not necessary to have four different networks to generate these four different gaits - it can all be done with a single circuit. The actual circuit generating quadrapedal gaits is more complex than that of Fig. 19. The interested reader is referred to a recent review by Ole Keihn (See Further Reading).
Recurrent excitation in nanocircuits and microcircuits appears to be critical for learning and memory processes.  Learning involves changes in the biophysical properties of neurons and changes in synaptic strength.  Accumulating evidence indicates positive feedback within biochemical cascades and gene networks is an important component for the induction and maintenance of these changes.  Moreover, recurrent excitation is found in at least some microcircuits involved in memory processes.  A prime example is found within the CA3 region of the hippocampus.
Figure 21 illustrates key features of the CA3 recurrent excitatory circuit.  Six different hippocampal pyramidal neurons are labeled as U, V, W, X, Y, and Z.  Each one of these neurons receives a synaptic connection from the presynaptic neurons labeled a, b, c, d, e, and f.  These presynaptic neurons can be either active or inactive with a 0 and black color representing an inactive neuron and a 1 and a green color indicating an active one.  An important aspect of this circuitry is that the synaptic connections from the input pathway are sufficiently strong to activate (fire) the pyramidal neuron to which they are connected.  For example, if neuron a is activated, neuron Z will be activated, which is represented as a 1 on the Output bar.  This topology is nothing more than feedforward excitation.  The reciprocal excitation makes this circuit special.  For example, neuron Z and the other pyramidal neurons have axon collaterals that feedback to connect with themselves.  But, they not only make a connection with themselves.  Each neuron makes a connection with each of the five other pyramidal neurons in the circuit.  So every pyramidal receives convergent information from all the other cells in the network, and, in turn, the output of each pyramidal neuron diverges to make synaptic connections with all the other pyramidal neurons in the circuit.  (Therefore, this recurrent excitation motif has embedded within it the convergence and divergence motifs.)  The matrix of connectivity consists of 36 elements.
In order for this network to learn anything, a synaptic plasticity learning rule needs to be embedded into the circuit.  One that is widely accepted is known as the Hebb Learning Rule.  Essentially, it states that a synapse will change its strength if that synapse is active (i.e., releases transmitter) and, at the same time, the postsynaptic cell is active.  The combination of this learning rule and the recurrent excitatory circuit leads to some interesting emergent properties.  For example, if neuron Z is activated by input a, the strength of its connection to itself (synapse 1) will change as indicated by the green colored synapse on Figure 21 (animation is on a 2 second loop to illustrate control and modified synapses).  However, synapse 1 will not be the only synapse that will be strengthened.  For example, synapse 13 will also be strengthened because neuron Z was active at the same time neuron X was activated by input c.  In contrast, synapse 7 is not strengthened because neuron Y was not active at the same time as neuron Z.  The net effect of this convergence and divergence and the learning rule is that an initial activity input pattern will be stored as changes in the elements of the connectivity matrix.  This circuit has therefore been called an auto-association network. An important concept here is that the ”memory” is not in any one synapse; it is distributed in the network.
Considerable progress has been made in understanding how different simple neural networks are involved in information processing and mediating behavior.  Feedforward excitation and feedforward inhibition mediate reflex behaviors.  Lateral inhibition is important for edge enhancement.  Recurrent excitation is an important mechanism for memory.  Recurrent inhibition can be important for generating locomotor behavior.  Convergence and divergence are embedded in these microcircuits.  The same kinds of network motifs are recapitulated in biochemical and gene networks. 
The next level of understanding is at the level of the neuronal networks that mediate more complex, so called higher-order functions of the brain.  Their understanding is becoming possible through the use of electrophysiological and optical recording techniques, and modern imaging techniques such as functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and diffusion tensor imaging (DTI).  fMRI allows investigators to identify areas of the brain that are engaged in cognitive tasks, whereas DTI allows visualization of pathways linking one brain region to another.  Figure 22 (courtesy of Tim Ellmore, Ph.D., Dept. of Neurosurgery, The University of Texas Medical School at Houston) is a side view of the human brain showing the pathways interconnecting cortical areas revealed using DTI!.  
Object recognition is an example where progress is being made in understanding macrocircuits.  As illustrated in Figure 23, processing of visual information starts in the retina and then engages multiple cortical regions such as the occipital cortex and the temporal cortex.  Within this macrocircuit are modules that extract higher-order information.  Each module presumably involves hundreds, if not thousands of individual microcircuits.  The challenge for the future is to determine how these modules work and how they interact with other modules.  Although feedforward connections are present, feedback connections and lateral connections are widespread.  The challenge is enormous but perhaps achievement of the goal will be facilitated by taking advantage of what has been learned about the principles of nanocircuits and microcircuits.  To understand the macrocircuits it will be necessary to know more than the topology of the network interconnections.  It will be necessary to know how each module functions and about the dynamics of the inter module connections. 
Theories of the encoding and transmission of information in the nervous system go back to the Greek physician Galen (129-210 AD), who suggested a hydraulic mechanism by which muscles contract because fluid flowing into them from hollow nerves. The basic theory held for centuries and was further elaborated by René Descartes (1596 – 1650) who suggested that animal spirits flowed from the brain through nerves and then to muscles to produce movements (See this animation for modern interpretation of such a hydraulic theory for nerve function). A major paradigm shift occurred with the pioneering work of Luigi Galvani who found in 1794 that nerve and muscle could be activated by charged electrodes and suggested that the nervous system functions via electrical signaling (see this animation of Galvani's experiment). However, there was debate among scholars whether the electricity was within nerves and muscle or whether the nerves and muscles were simply responding to the harmful electric shock via some intrinsic nonelectric mechanism. The issue was not resolved until the 1930s with the development of modern electronic amplifiers and recording devices that allowed the electrical signals to be recorded. One example is the pioneering work of H.K. Hartline 80 years ago on electrical signaling in the horseshoe crab Limulus . Electrodes were placed on the surface of an optic nerve. (By placing electrodes on the surface of a nerve, it is possible to obtain an indication of the changes in membrane potential that are occurring between the outside and inside of the nerve cell.) Then 1-s duration flashes of light of varied intensities were presented to the eye; first dim light, then brighter lights. Very dim lights produced no changes in the activity, but brighter lights produced small repetitive spike-like events. These spike-like events are called action potentials, nerve impulses, or sometimes simply spikes. Action potentials are the basic events the nerve cells use to transmit information from one place to another.
The recordings in the figure above illustrate three very important features of nerve action potentials. First, the nerve action potential has a short duration (about 1 msec). Second, nerve action potentials are elicited in an all-or-nothing fashion. Third, nerve cells code the intensity of information by the frequency of action potentials. When the intensity of the stimulus is increased, the size of the action potential does not become larger. Rather, the frequency or the number of action potentials increases. In general, the greater the intensity of a stimulus, (whether it be a light stimulus to a photoreceptor, a mechanical stimulus to the skin, or a stretch to a muscle receptor) the greater the number of action potentials elicited. Similarly, for the motor system, the greater the number of action potentials in a motor neuron, the greater the intensity of the contraction of a muscle that is innervated by that motor neuron.
Action potentials are of great importance to the functioning of the brain since they propagate information in the nervous system to the central nervous system and propagate commands initiated in the central nervous system to the periphery. Consequently, it is necessary to understand thoroughly their properties. To answer the questions of how action potentials are initiated and propagated, we need to record the potential between the inside and outside of nerve cells using intracellular recording techniques.
The potential difference across a nerve cell membrane can be measured with a microelectrode whose tip is so small (about a micron) that it can penetrate the cell without producing any damage. When the electrode is in the bath (the extracellular medium) there is no potential recorded because the bath is isopotential. If the microelectrode is carefully inserted into the cell, there is a sharp change in potential. The reading of the voltmeter instantaneously changes from 0 mV, to reading a potential difference of -60 mV inside the cell with respect to the outside. The potential that is recorded when a living cell is impaled with a microelectrode is called the resting potential, and varies from cell to cell. Here it is shown to be -60 mV, but can range between -80 mV and -40 mV, depending on the particular type of nerve cell. In the absence of any stimulation, the resting potential is generally constant.
It is also possible to record and study the action potential. Figure 1.3 illustrates an example in which a neuron has already been impaled with one microelectrode (the recording electrode), which is connected to a voltmeter. The electrode records a resting potential of -60 mV. The cell has also been impaled with a second electrode called the stimulating electrode. This electrode is connected to a battery and a device that can monitor the amount of current (I) that flows through the electrode. Changes in membrane potential are produced by closing the switch and by systematically changing both the size and polarity of the battery. If the negative pole of the battery is connected to the inside of the cell as in Figure 1.3A, an instantaneous change in the amount of current will flow through the stimulating electrode, and the membrane potential becomes transiently more negative. This result should not be surprising. The negative pole of the battery makes the inside of the cell more negative than it was before. A change in potential that increases the polarized state of a membrane is called a hyperpolarization. The cell is more polarized than it was normally. Use yet a larger battery and the potential becomes even larger. The resultant hyperpolarizations are graded functions of the magnitude of the stimuli used to produce them.
Now consider the case in which the positive pole of the battery is connected to the electrode (Figure 1.3B).  When the positive pole of the battery is connected to the electrode, the potential of the cell becomes more positive when the switch is closed (Figure 1.3B). Such potentials are called depolarizations. The polarized state of the membrane is decreased. Larger batteries produce even larger depolarizations. Again, the magnitude of the responses are proportional to the magnitude of the stimuli. However, an unusual event occurs when the magnitude of the depolarization reaches a level of membrane potential called the threshold. A totally new type of signal is initiated; the action potential. Note that if the size of the battery is increased even more, the amplitude of the action potential is the same as the previous one (Figure 1.3B). The process of eliciting an action potential in a nerve cell is analogous to igniting a fuse with a heat source. A certain minimum temperature (threshold) is necessary. Temperatures less than the threshold fail to ignite the fuse. Temperatures greater than the threshold ignite the fuse just as well as the threshold temperature and the fuse does not burn any brighter or hotter.
If the suprathreshold current stimulus is long enough, however, a train of action potentials will be elicited. In general, the action potentials will continue to fire as long as the stimulus continues, with the frequency of firing being proportional to the magnitude of the stimulus (Figure 1.4).
Action potentials are not only initiated in an all-or-nothing fashion, but they are also propagated in an all-or-nothing fashion. An action potential initiated in the cell body of a motor neuron in the spinal cord will propagate in an undecremented fashion all the way to the synaptic terminals of that motor neuron. Again, the situation is analogous to a burning fuse.  Once the fuse is ignited, the flame will spread to its end.
The action potential consists of several components (Figure 1.3B). The threshold is the value of the membrane potential which, if reached, leads to the all-or-nothing initiation of an action potential. The initial or rising phase of the action potential is called the depolarizing phase or the upstroke. The region of the action potential between the 0 mV level and the peak amplitude is the overshoot. The return of the membrane potential to the resting potential is called the repolarization phase. There is also a phase of the action potential during which time the membrane potential can be more negative than the resting potential. This phase of the action potential is called the undershoot or the hyperpolarizing afterpotential.  In Figure 1.4, the undershoots of the action potentials do not become more negative than the resting potential because they are "riding" on the constant depolarizing stimulus.
Before examining the ionic mechanisms of action potentials, it is first necessary to understand the ionic mechanisms of the resting potential. The two phenomena are intimately related. The story of the resting potential goes back to the early 1900's when Julius Bernstein suggested that the resting potential (Vm) was equal to the potassium equilibrium potential (EK). Where
The key to understanding the resting potential is the fact that ions are distributed unequally on the inside and outside of cells, and that cell membranes are selectively permeable to different ions. K+ is particularly important for the resting potential. The membrane is highly permeable to K+. In addition, the inside of the cell has a high concentration of K+ ([K+]i) and the outside of the cell has a low concentration of K+ ([K+]o). Thus, K+ will naturally move by diffusion from its region of high concentration to its region of low concentration. Consequently, the positive K+ ions leaving the inner surface of the membrane leave behind some negatively charged ions. That negative charge attracts the positive charge of the K+ ion that is leaving and tends to "pull it back". Thus, there will be an electrical force directed inward that will tend to counterbalance the diffusional force directed outward. Eventually, an equilibrium will be established; the concentration force moving K+ out will balance the electrical force holding it in. The potential at which that balance is achieved is called the Nernst Equilibrium Potential.
An experiment to test Bernstein's hypothesis that the membrane potential is equal to the Nernst Equilibrium Potential (i.e., Vm = EK) is illustrated to the left.
The K+ concentration outside the cell was systematically varied while the membrane potential was measured. Also shown is the line that is predicted by the Nernst Equation. The experimentally measured points are very close to this line. Moreover, because of the logarithmic relationship in the Nernst equation, a change in concentration of K+ by a factor of 10 results in a 60 mV change in potential.
Note, however, that there are some deviations in the figure at left from what is predicted by the Nernst equation. Thus, one cannot conclude that Vm = EK. Such deviations indicate that another ion is also involved in generating the resting potential. That ion is Na+. The high concentration of Na+ outside the cell and relatively low concentration inside the cell results in a chemical (diffusional) driving force for Na+ influx. There is also an electrical driving force because the inside of the cell is negative and this negativity attracts the positive sodium ions. Consequently, if the cell has a small permeability to sodium, Na+ will move across the membrane and the membrane potential would be more depolarized than would be expected from the K+ equilibrium potential.
When a membrane is permeable to two different ions, the Nernst equation can no longer be used to precisely determine the membrane potential. It is possible, however, to apply the GHK equation. This equation describes the potential across a membrane that is permeable to both Na+ and K+.
Note that α is the ratio of Na+ permeability (PNa) to K+ permeability (PK). Note also that if the permeability of the membrane to Na+ is 0, then alpha in the GHK is 0, and the Goldman-Hodgkin-Katz equation reduces to the Nernst equilibrium potential for K+. If the permeability of the membrane to Na+ is very high and the potassium permeability is very low, the [Na+] terms become very large, dominating the equation compared to the [K+] terms, and the GHK equation reduces to the Nernst equilibrium potential for Na+.
If the GHK equation is applied to the same data in Figure 1.5, there is a much better fit. The value of alpha needed to obtain this good fit was 0.01. This means that the potassium K+ permeability is 100 times the Na+ permeability. In summary, the resting potential is due not only to the fact that there is a high permeability to K+. There is also a slight permeability to Na+, which tends to make the membrane potential slightly more positive than it would have been if the membrane were permeable to K+ alone.
Click here to go to the interactive Membrane Potential Laboratory to experiment with the effects of altering external or internal potassium ion concentration and membrane permeability to sodium and potassium ions. Predictions are made using the Nernst and the Goldman, Hodgkin, Katz equations.
Na+ is critical for the action potential in nerve cells. As shown in Figure 2.1, action potentials are repeatedly initiated as the extracellular concentration of Na+ is modified. As the concentration of sodium in the extracellular solution is reduced, the action potentials become smaller.
However, there are some deviations between what is measured and what is predicted by the Nernst equation. Why? One reason for the deviation is the continued K+ permeability. If there is continued K+ permeability, the membrane potential will never reach its ideal value (the sodium equilibrium potential) because the diffusion of K+ ions tends to make the cell negative. This point can be understood with the aid of the GHK equation.
An action potential is bounded by a region bordered on one extreme by the K+ equilibrium potential (-75 mV) and on the other extreme by the Na+ equilibrium potential (+55 mV). The resting potential is -60 mV. Note that the resting potential is not equal to the K+ equilibrium potential because, as discussed previously, there is a small resting Na+ permeability that makes the cell slightly more positive than EK. In principle, any point along the trajectory of action potential can be obtained simply by varying alpha in the GHK equation. If alpha is very large, the Na+ terms dominate, and according to the GHK equation, the membrane potential will move towards the Na+ equilibrium potential. The peak of the action potentials approaches but does not quite reach ENa, because the membrane retains its permeability to K+.
How is it possible for a cell to initially have a resting potential of -60 mV and then, in response to some stimulus (a brief transient depolarization which reaches threshold), change in less than one millisecond to having a potential of approximately +40 mV? In the 1950's, Hodgkin and Huxley, two British neurobiologists, provided a hypothesis for this transition. They suggested that the properties of some Na+ channels in nerve cells (and muscle cells) were unique in that these channels were normally closed but could be opened by a depolarization. This simple hypothesis of voltage-dependent Na+ channels goes a long way toward explaining the initiation of the action potential. Suppose a small depolarization causes some of the Na+ channels to open. The key point is that the increase in Na+ permeability would produce a greater depolarization, which will lead to an even greater number of Na+ channels opening and the membrane potential becoming even more depolarized. Once some critical level is reached a positive feedback or regenerative cycle will be initiated, causing the membrane potential to depolarize rapidly from -60 mV to a value approaching the Na+ equilibrium potential.
In order to test the Na+ hypothesis for the initiation of the action potential, it is necessary to stabilize the membrane potential at a number of different levels and measure the permeability at those potentials. An electronic device known as a voltage-clamp amplifier can "clamp" or stabilize the membrane potential to any desired level and measure the resultant current required for that stabilization. The amount of current necessary to stabilize the potential can then be used to quantify membrane permeability. Hodgkin and Huxley clamped the membrane potential to various levels and measured the changes in Na+ conductances (an electrical term for permeability, which for the present discussion can be used interchangeably). The more the cell is depolarized, the greater is the Na+ conductance. Thus, the experiment provided support for the existence of voltage-dependent Na+ channels.
Figure 2.4 also indicates an important property of the voltage-dependent Na+ channels. Note that the permeability increases rapidly and then, despite the fact that the membrane potential is clamped, the permeability decays back to its initial level. This phenomenon is called inactivation. The Na+ channels begin to close, even in the continued presence of the depolarization. Inactivation contributes to the repolarization of the action potential. However, inactivation is not enough by itself to account fully for the repolarization.
In addition to voltage-dependent changes in Na+ permeability, there are voltage-dependent changes in K+ permeability. These changes can be measured with the voltage-clamp technique as well. The figure shown to above indicates the changes in K+ conductance as well as the Na+ conductance. There are two important points.
First, just as there are channels in the membrane that are permeable to Na+ that are normally closed but then open in response to a voltage, there are also channels in the membrane that are selectively permeable to K+. These K+ channels are normally closed, but open in response to depolarization.
Second, a major difference between the changes in the K+ channels and the changes in the Na+ channels is that the K+ channels are slower to activate or open. (Some K+ channels also do not inactivate.)  Note that the return of the conductance at the end of the pulse is not the process of inactivation.  With the removal of the pulse, the activated channels are deactivated.
Some initial depolarization (e.g., a synaptic potential) will begin to open the Na+ channels. The increase in the Na+ influx leads to a further depolarization.
A positive feedback cycle rapidly moves the membrane potential toward its peak value, which is close but not equal to the Na+ equilibrium potential. Two processes which contribute to repolarization at the peak of the action potential are then engaged. First, the Na+ conductance starts to decline due to inactivation. As the Na+ conductance decreases, another feedback cycle is initiated, but this one is a downward cycle. Sodium conductance decreases, the membrane potential begins to repolarize, and the Na+ channels that are open and not yet inactivated are deactivated and close. Second, the K+ conductance increases. Initially, there is very little change in the K+ conductance because these channels are slow to open, but by the peak of the action potential, the K+ conductance begins to increase significantly and a second force contributes to repolarization. As the result of these two forces, the membrane potential rapidly returns to the resting potential. At the time it reaches -60 mV, the Na+ conductance has returned to its initial value. Nevertheless, the membrane potential becomes more negative (the undershoot or the hyperpolarizing afterpotential).
The key to understanding the hyperpolarizing afterpotential is in the slowness of the K+ channels. Just as the K+ channels are slow to open (activate), they are also slow to close (deactivate). Once the membrane potential starts to repolarize, the K+ channels begin to close because they sense the voltage. However, even though the membrane potential has returned to -60 mV, some of the voltage-dependent K+ channels remain open. Thus, the membrane potential will be more negative than it was initially. Eventually, these K+ channels close, and the membrane potential returns to -60 mV.
Why does the cell go through these elaborate mechanisms to generate an action potential with a short duration? Recall how information is coded in the nervous system. If the action potential was about one msec in duration, the frequency of action potentials could change from once a second to a thousand a second. Therefore, short action potentials provide the nerve cell with the potential for a large dynamic range of signaling.
Some chemical agents can selectively block voltage-dependent membrane channels. Tetrodotoxin (TTX), which comes from the Japanese puffer fish, blocks the voltage-dependent changes in Na+ permeability, but has no effect on the voltage-dependent changes in K+ permeability. This observation indicates that the Na+ and K+ channels are unique; one of these can be selectively blocked and not affect the other. Another agent, tetraethylammonium (TEA), has no effect on the voltage-dependent changes in Na+ permeability, but it completely abolishes the voltage-dependent changes in K+ permeability.
Use these two agents (TTX and TEA) to test your understanding of the ionic mechanisms of the action potential. What effect would treating an axon with TTX have on an action potential? An action potential would not occur because an action potential in an axon cannot be initiated without voltage-dependent Na+ channels. How would TEA affect the action potential? It would be longer and would not have an undershoot.
In the presence of TEA the initial phase of the action potential is identical, but note that it is much longer and does not have an after-hyperpolarization. There is a repolarization phase, but now the repolarization is due to the process of Na+ inactivation alone. Note that in the presence of TEA, there is no change in the resting potential. The channels in the membrane that endow the cell with the resting potential are different from the ones that are opened by voltage. They are not blocked by TEA. TEA only affects the voltage-dependent changes in K+ permeability.
It is easy to receive the impression that there is a "gush" of Na+ that comes into the cell with each action potential. Although, there is some influx of Na+, it is minute compared to the intracellular concentration of Na+. The influx is insufficient to make any noticeable change in the intracellular concentration of Na+. Therefore, the Na+ equilibrium potential does not change during or after an action potential. For any individual action potential, the amount of Na+ that comes into the cell and the amount of K+ that leaves are insignificant and have no effect on the bulk concentrations. However, without some compensatory mechanism, over the long-term (many spikes), Na+ influx and K+ efflux would begin to alter the concentrations and the resultant Na+ and K+ equilibrium potentials. The Na+-K+ pumps in nerve cells provide for the long-term maintenance of these concentration gradients. They keep the intracellular concentrations of K+ high and the Na+ low, and thereby maintain the Na+ equilibrium potential and the K+ equilibrium potential. The pumps are necessary for the long-term maintenance of the "batteries" so that resting potentials and action potentials can be supported.
So far, two basic classes of channels, voltage-dependent or voltage-gated channels and voltage-independent channels, have been considered. Voltage-dependent channels can be further divided based on their permeation properties into voltage-dependent Na+ channels and voltage-dependent K+ channels. There are also voltage-dependent Ca2+ channels (see chapter on Synaptic Transmission). Indeed, there are multiple types of Ca2+ channels and voltage-dependent K+ channels. Nevertheless, all these channels are conceptually similar. They are membrane channels that are normally closed and as a result of changes in potential, the channel (pore) is opened. The amino acid sequence of these channels is known in considerable detail and specific amino acid sequences have been related to specific aspects of channel function (e.g., ion selectivity, voltage gating, inactivation). A third major channel class, the transmitter-gated or ligand-gated channels, will be described later.
Ion channel mutations have been identified as a possible cause of a wide variety of inherited disorders.  Several disorders  involving muscle membrane excitability have been  associated with mutations  in calcium, sodium and chloride channels as well as acetylcholine receptors and have been labeled ‘channelopathies’. It is possible that movement disorders, epilepsy and headache, as well as other rare inherited diseases, might be  linked to ion channels. The manifestations and mechanisms of channelopathies affecting neurons are reviewed in Kullman, 2002.  The existence of channelopathies may provide insights into the variety of cellular mechanisms  associated with the misfunctioning of neuronal circuits.
The absolute refractory period is a period of time after the initiation of one action potential when it is impossible to initiate a second action potential no matter how much the cell is depolarized. The relative refractory period is a period after one action potential is initiated when it is possible to initiate a second action potential, but only with a greater depolarization than was necessary to initiate the first. The relative refractory period can be understood at least in part by the hyperpolarizing afterpotential. Assume that an initial stimulus depolarized a cell from -60 mV to -45 mV in order to reach threshold and then consider delivering the same 15-mV stimulus sometime during the after-hyperpolarization. The stimulus would again depolarize the cell but the depolarization would be below threshold and insufficient to trigger an action potential. If the stimulus was made larger, however, such that it again was capable of depolarizing the cell to threshold (-45 mV), an action potential could be initiated.
The absolute refractory period can be explained by the dynamics of the process of Na+-inactivation, the features of which are illustrated in Figure 2.10. Here, two voltage clamp pulses are delivered. The first pulse produces a voltage-dependent increase in the Na+ permeability which then undergoes the process of inactivation. If the two pulses are separated sufficiently in time, the second pulse produces a change in the Na+ conductance, which is identical to the first pulse. However, if the second pulse comes soon after the first pulse, then the change in Na+ conductance produced by the second pulse is less than that produced by the first. Indeed, if the second pulse occurs immediately after the first pulse, the second pulse produces no change in the Na+ conductance. Therefore, when the Na+ channels open and spontaneously inactivate, it takes time (several msec) for them to recover from that inactivation. This process of recovery from inactivation underlies the absolute refractory period. During an action potential the Na+ channels open and then they become inactivated. Therefore, if a second stimulus is delivered soon after the one that initiated the first spike, there will be few Na+ channels available to be opened by the second stimulus because they have been inactivated by the first action potential. The absolute refractory period seems like a relatively unimportant phenomenon, but actually it is essential to ensure unidirectional propagation of action potentials along axons.
Once an action potential is initiated at one point in the nerve cell, how does it propagate to the synaptic terminal region in an all-or-nothing fashion
Figure 3.1 shows a schematic diagram of an axon and the charge distributions that would be expected to occur along the membrane of that axon. Positive charges exist on the outside of the axon and negative charges on the inside. Now consider the consequences of delivering some stimulus to a point in the middle of the axon. If the depolarization is sufficiently large, voltage-dependent sodium channels will be opened, and an action potential will be initiated.
Consider for the moment "freezing" the action potential at its peak value. Its peak value now will be about +40 mV inside with respect to the outside. Unlike charges attract, so the positive charge will move to the adjacent region of the membrane. As the charge moves to the adjacent region of the membrane, the adjacent region of the membrane will depolarize. If it depolarizes sufficiently, as it will, voltage-dependent sodium channels in the adjacent region of the membrane will be opened and a "new" action potential will be initiated. This charge distribution will then spread to the next region and initiate other "new" action potentials. One way of viewing this process is with a thermal analogue. You can think of an axon as a piece of wire coated with gunpowder (the gunpowder is analogous to the sodium channels). If a sufficient stimulus (heat) is delivered to the wire, the gunpowder will ignite, generate heat, and the heat will spread along the wire to adjacent regions and cause the gunpowder in the adjacent regions to ignite.
A great variability is found in the velocity of the propagation of action potentials. In fact, the propagation velocity of the action potentials in nerves can vary from 100 meters per second (580 miles per hour) to less than a tenth of a meter per second (0.22 miles per hour). Why do some axons propagate information very rapidly and others slowly? In order to understand how this process works, it is necessary to consider two so-called passive properties of membranes, the time constant and the space or length constant. Why are these called passive properties? They have nothing to do with any of the voltage-dependent conductances discussed earlier. They have nothing to do with any pumps or exchangers. They are intrinsic properties of all biological membranes.
Time Constant. First, consider a thermal analogue. Place a block of metal at 10oC on a hotplate at 100oC. How would the temperature change? It will increase from its initial value of 10oC to a final value of 100oC. But the temperature will not change instantly. In fact, it would change as an exponential function of time. An analogous situation occurs in nerve cells, when they receive an instantaneous stimulus. The figure at right represents an idealized nerve cell. The recording electrode initially measures a potential of -60 mV (the resting potential). At some point in time (time 0), the switch is closed. The switch closure occurs instantaneously and as a result of the instantaneous closure, instantaneous current flows through the circuit. (This is equivalent to slamming the block of metal on the hotplate.) Note that despite the fact that this stimulus changes instantly, the change in potential does not occur instantaneously. It takes time for the potential to change from its initial value of -60 mV to its final value of -50 mV. There is a total of 10 mV depolarization, but the change occurs as an exponential function of time.
There is a convenient index of how rapidly exponential functions change with time. The index is denoted by the symbol τ and called the time constant. It is defined as the amount of time it takes for the change in potential to reach 63% of its final value. (Why 63%?) In this example, the potential changes from -60 to -50 and the 63% value is -53.7 mV. Thus, the time constant is 10 msec. The smaller the time constant, the more rapid will be the change in response to a stimulus. Therefore, if this neuron had a time constant of 5 msec, then in 5 msec the membrane potential would reach -53.7 mV. The time constant is analogous to the 0 to 60 rating of a high performance car; the lower the 0 to 60 rating, the faster the car. The lower the time constant, the faster or more rapidly a membrane will respond to a stimulus. The effects of the time constant on propagation velocity will become clear below.
The time constant is a function of two properties of membranes, the membrane resistance (Rm ) and the membrane capacitance (Cm ). Rm is the inverse of the permeability; the higher the permeability, the lower the resistance, and vice versa. Membranes, like the physical devices known as capacitors, can store charge. When a stimulus is delivered, it takes time to charge up the membrane to its new value.
[Please consult a college-level textbook on physics for a review of the basic properties of resistors and capacitors. For an additional review of resistors, capacitors and time constants and the use of hydraulic analogues to understand them see:  Byrne, J. H., Understanding Electricity with Water, epub, Lulu.com, 2011.]
Space Constant. Consider another thermal analogue. Take a long, metal rod that is again initially at 10oC and consider the consequences of touching one end of the rod to a hotplate which is at 100oC. (Assume that it is placed there for a certain amount of time to allow the temperature changes to stabilize.) How would the temperature be distributed along the length of the rod? There would be a temperature gradient along the rod because of the increasing loss of heat with greater distances from the heat source.  The temperature gradient can be described by an exponential function of distance because of the physical processes involved.
An analogous situation occurs in nerve cells. The figure at left represents an idealized nerve cell in which recordings are made from different regions along the axon at 1 mm increments. The cell body is impaled with a stimulating electrode connected to a battery, the value of which changes the potential of the cell body to -50 mV (the equivalent of putting a 10oC rod on a 100oC hot plate). This axon, even though it initially had a spatially uniform resting potential of -60 mV, now has a potential of -50 mV in the soma because that is the region in which the stimulus is applied. However, the potential is not -50 mV all along the axon; it varies as a function of distance from the soma. One mm away the potential is -56 mV; at 2 mm away it is even closer to -60 mV; and far enough along the axon, the potential of the axon is -60 mV, the resting potential. Just as there is an index for how a change in potential changes with the time (the time constant), there is also an index denoted by the symbol λ (called the space constant or the length constant) which is an indication of how far a potential will spread along an axon in response to a subthreshold stimulus at another point. In Figure 3.3, the space constant or length constant is 1 mm. In 1 mm the potential will change by 63% of its final value. If λ was greater than 1 mm, the potential would spread a greater distance. If λ was 1/2 mm, the potential would spread less along the axon. Thus, whereas the time constant is an index of how rapidly a membrane would respond to a stimulus in time, the space constant is an index of how well a subthreshold potential will spread along an axon as a function of distance. The space constant is a passive property of membranes. Although it influences the rate of propagation of the action potentials, it is an independent process. It is like the surface of a race track and the action potential is like the race car. If the surface is muddy, the car will go slow, if it is firm and paved, the same car will be able to go much faster.
The length constant can be described in terms of the physical parameters of the axon, where d is the diameter of the axon, Rm is, as before, the membrane resistance, the inverse of the permeability, and Ri is the internal resistance (resistance of the axoplasm). Ri is an indicator of the ability of charges to move along the inner surface of the axon. A small subthreshold change in the charge distribution at one point along an axon will spread along the axon, but as it does some will diffuse back out of the membrane and some will continue to move along the axon. If the resistance of the membrane (Rm) is high, less will leak out and relatively more will move along the axon. Increasing Rm is like putting insulation on a metal rod and heating the rod at one end. With more insulation (more resistance to heat loss to the outside of the rod), more heat will travel along the inside of the rod.
Propagation Velocity. How are the time constant and the space constant related to propagation velocity of action potentials? The smaller the time constant, the more rapidly a depolarization will affect the adjacent region. If a depolarization more rapidly affects an adjacent region, it will bring the adjacent region to threshold sooner. Therefore, the smaller the time constant, the more rapid will be the propagation velocity. If the space constant is large, a potential change at one point would spread a greater distance along the axon and bring distance regions to threshold sooner. Therefore, the greater the space constant, the more rapidly distant regions will be brought to threshold and the more rapid will be the propagation velocity. Thus, the propagation velocity is directly proportional to the space constant and inversely proportional to the time constant. There are separate equations that describe both the time constant and the space constant. The insight above allows us to make a new equation that combines the two.
The equation provides insights into how it is possible for different axons to have different propagation velocities. One way of endowing an axon with a high propagation velocity is to increase the diameter. However, there is one serious problem in changing the propagation velocity by simply changing the diameter. To double the velocity, it is necessary to quadruple the diameter. Clearly there must be a better way of increasing propagation velocity than by simply increasing the diameter.
Another way to increase the propagation velocity is to decrease the membrane capacitance. This can be achieved by coating axons with a thick insulating sheath known as myelin. One potential problem with this approach is that the process of covering the axon would cover voltage-dependent Na+ channels. If Na+ channels are occluded, it would be impossible to generate an action potential. Instead of coating the entire axon with the myelin, only sections are coated and some regions called nodes are left bare.
Propagation of action potentials in myelinated fibers is illustrated in Figure 3.4. Start with an action potential at a node on the left. In the absence of myelin, the action potential would propagate actively through the simple mechanisms discussed above.  However, now the myelin occludes all the voltage-dependent sodium channels so the action potential can not propagate actively. (In fact, myelinated axons do not even have sodium channels in the internodal region.) Rather, the potential change produced by the action potential at one node spreads in the internodal region along the axon passively just as the temperature would spread along a long metal rod. The potential spreads, but gets smaller (decrements), just as a temperature change induced at one end of a rod would get smaller as it spreads along a rod.
Now consider the point at which the passively spreading potential reaches the next node. A "new" action potential will be initiated. The stimulus for this action potential is the depolarization that emerges from the end of the myelin. Each node acts as a "relay station" that renews the decremented signal. Think of the gunpowder analogue again, but this time coat the rod with some insulation and put gunpowder only at the bare regions. Because of the insulation, a temperature change produced by the ignition of the gunpowder will spread effectively along the metal rod. Some loss of temperature will occur but it will be sufficient to ignite the gunpowder at the next region and the process will repeat itself.
The synapse is a specialized structure that allows one neuron to communicate with another neuron or a muscle cell. There are billions of nerve cells in the brain and each nerve cell can make and receive up to 10,000 synaptic connections with other nerve cells. Also, the strength of the synapse is modifiable. Changes in the strength of synapses endow the nervous system with the ability to store information.
The synapse for which most is known is the one formed between a spinal motor neuron and a skeletal muscle cell. Historically, it has been studied extensively because it is relatively easy to analyze. However, the basic properties of synaptic transmission at the skeletal neuromuscular junction are very similar to the process of synaptic transmission in the central nervous system.
Consequently, an understanding of this synapse leads to an understanding of the others. Therefore, we will first discuss the process of synaptic transmission at the skeletal neuromuscular junction.
The features of the synaptic junction at the neuromuscular junction are shown in the figure at left. Skeletal muscle fibers are innervated by motor neurons whose cell bodies are located in the ventral horn of the spinal cord. The terminal region of the axon gives rise to very fine processes that run along skeletal muscle cells. Along these processes are specialized structures known as synapses. The particular synapse made between a spinal motor neuron and skeletal muscle cell is called the motor endplate because of its specific structure.
The synapse at the neuromuscular junction has three characteristic features of chemical synapses in the nervous system. First, there is a distinct separation between the presynaptic and the postsynaptic membrane. The space between the two is known as the synaptic cleft. The space tells us there must be some intermediary signaling mechanism between the presynaptic neuron and the postsynaptic neuron in order to have information flow across the synaptic cleft. Second, there is a characteristic high density of small spherical vesicles. These synaptic vesicles contain neurotransmitter substances. Synapses are also associated with a high density of mitochondria. Third, in most cases, there is a characteristic thickening of the postsynaptic membrane, which is due at least in part to the fact that the postsynaptic membrane has a high density of specialized receptors that bind the chemical transmitter substances released from the presynaptic neuron. Additional details on the morphological features of synaptic junctions is provided in Chapter 8 and Chapter 10.
The figure at the right illustrates in a very schematic way how it is possible to study the physiology of synaptic transmission at the skeletal neuromuscular junction in great detail. A piece of muscle and its attached nerve are placed in a small experimental chamber filled with an appropriate Ringer solution. The resting potential of the muscle cell is recorded with a microelectrode. Electrodes are also placed on the surface of the nerve axon. Brief electric shocks cause action potentials to be initiated, which propagate to the synaptic terminal.
The figure below illustrates two types of potential changes that were recorded in such an isolated nerve-muscle preparation. The experiment also illustrates the properties of a powerful drug, curare, which has proven to be very useful in studying the process of synaptic transmission at the skeletal neuromuscular junction. Part A illustrates the sequence of potential changes recorded in the muscle cell as a result of stimulating the motor axon. The arrow indicates the point in time when the shock is delivered to the motor axon. Note that there is a quiescent period of time after the shock. The delay is due to the time it takes for the action potential in the motor axon to propagate from its site of initiation. After the delay, there are two types of potentials recorded in the muscle cell. First, there is a relatively slowly changing potential that will be the focus of the following discussion. If that slow initial potential is sufficiently large, as it normally is in skeletal muscle cells, a second potential, an action potential, is elicited in the muscle cell.
Action potentials in skeletal muscle cells are due to ionic mechanisms similar to those discussed previously. Specifically, there is a voltage-dependent change in Na+ permeability followed by a delayed increase in K+ permeability. (For smooth muscle cells and cardiac muscle cells the ionic mechanisms are different, however.)
The underlying event that triggers the action potential can be revealed by taking advantage of curare, an arrow poison used by some South American Indians. A low dose of curare (Part B) reduces the underlying event, but it is still not sufficiently reduced to fall below threshold. If a somewhat higher dose of curare is delivered (Part C), the slow underlying event becomes subthreshold. The underlying signal is known as the endplate potential (EPP) because it is a potential change recorded at the motor endplate. Generally, it is known as an excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP).
Curare blocks the endplate potential because it is a competitive inhibitor of acetylcholine (ACh), the transmitter released at the presynaptic terminal. Curare does not block the voltage-dependent Na+ conductance or the voltage-dependent K+ conductance that underlies the muscle action potential. Curare affects the stimulus (the EPSP) which normally leads to the initiation of the muscle action potential. An animal that is poisoned with curare will asphyxiate because the process of neuromuscular transmission at respiratory muscles is blocked.
Normally, the magnitude of the endplate potential is quite large. Indeed, the amplitude of the endplate potential is about 50 mV, but only about 30 mV is needed to reach threshold. The extra 20 mV is called the safety factor. Therefore, even if the endplate potential were to become somewhat smaller (e.g., 40 mV in amplitude) because of fatigue, the EPP would reach threshold and the one-to-one relationship between an action potential in the motor axon and an action potential in the muscle cell would be preserved.
The figure on the left illustrates an experiment that examines the propagation of the endplate potential. The muscle fiber is impaled repeatedly with electrodes at 1 mm intervals. (Note that the endplate potential is small because this experiment is done in the presence of a low concentration of curare so the endplate potential can be recorded without the complications of triggering an action potential.) The endplate potential is not propagated in an all-or-nothing fashion. It does spread along the muscle, but it does so with decrement. Thus, the spread of the endplate potential from its site of initiation to other sites along the muscle cell occurs passively and with decrement, just as a subthreshold potential change in one portion of the axon spreads along the axon, or just as a change in temperature at one point on a metal rod spreads along the rod.
What are the other steps in the process of chemical synaptic transmission? Figure 4.5 provides an overview. A nerve action potential that is initiated in the cell body of a spinal motor neuron propagates out the ventral roots and eventually invades the synaptic terminals of the motor neurons. As a result of the action potential, the chemical transmitter acetylcholine (ACh) is released into the synaptic cleft. ACh diffuses across the synaptic cleft and binds to special receptors on the postsynaptic or the postjunctional membrane. The binding of ACh to its receptors produces a conformational change in a membrane channel that is specifically permeable to both Na+ and K+. As a result of an increase in Na+ and K+ permeability, there is a depolarization of the postsynaptic membrane. That depolarization is called the endplate potential or more generally the EPSP. If the EPSP is sufficiently large, as it normally is at the neuromuscular junction, it leads to initiation of an action potential in the muscle cell. The action potential initiates the process of excitation contraction coupling and the development of tension. The duration of the endplate potential is about 10 msec.
Two factors control the duration of the EPSP at the neuromuscular junction. First, ACh is removed by diffusion. Second, a substance in the synaptic cleft, called acetylcholinesterase (AChE), hydrolyzes or breaks down ACh. AChE is one of the most efficient enzymes known. A single molecule of AChE can hydrolyze 600,000 molecules of ACh per minute.
An important family of substances, one of which is neostigmine, inhibits the action of AChE. Neostigmine blocks the action of AChE, and thereby makes the endplate potential larger and longer in duration. This figure illustrates two endplate potentials. One was recorded in saline and curare and a second recorded after neostigmine was added to the solution. (Curare is added so that the properties of the EPP can be studied without triggering an action potential in the muscle cell.) After applying neostigmine the endplate potential is much larger and longer in duration.
Myasthenia gravis is associated with severe muscular weakness because of a decrease in the number of acetylcholine receptors in the muscle cell. If the endplate potential is smaller, the endplate potential will fail to reach threshold. If it fails to reach threshold, there will be no action potential in the muscle cell and no contraction of the muscle, which causes muscular weakness. Neostigmine and other inhibitors of AChE are used to treat patients with myasthenia gravis. These agents make the amount of acetylcholine that is released more effectively reach the remaining acetylcholine receptors.
Although inhibitors of AChE have important therapeutic value, some inhibitors have been, and are still used as poisons. Some AChE inhibitors such as Soman and Sarin form a fairly irreversible block of AChE. This block leads to extreme levels of ACh in the synaptic cleft. Individuals so poisoned die from seizures and muscle spasticity including respiratory muscles.
Iontophoresis is an interesting technique that can be used to further test the hypothesis that ACh is the neurotransmitter substance at the neuromuscular junction. If ACh is the transmitter that is released by this synapse, one would predict that it should be possible to substitute artificial application of the transmitter for the normal release of the transmitter. Since ACh is a positively charged molecule, it can be forced out of a microelectrode to simulate the release of ACh from a presynaptic terminal.
Indeed, minute amounts of ACh can be applied to the vicinity of the neuromuscular junction. Figure 4.8 compares an EPP produced by stimulation of the motor axon and the response to ejections of ACh. The potential change looks nearly identical to the endplate potential produced by the normal release of ACh. This experiment provides experimental support for the concept that ACh is the natural transmitter at this synapse.
The response to the ejection of ACh has some other interesting properties that are all consistent with the cholinergic nature of the synapse at the skeletal neuromuscular junction. Neostigmine makes the response to the iontophoresis of ACh longer and larger. Curare reduces the response because it competes with the normal binding of ACh. If ACh is ejected into the muscle cell, nothing happens because the receptors for acetylcholine are not in the inside; they are on the outside of the muscle cell. Application of acetylcholine to regions of the muscle away from the end-plate produces no response because the receptors for the ACh are concentrated at the synaptic region.
To test your understanding so far, consider how an agent such as TTX would affect the generation of both an EPP and the response of a muscle fiber to the iontophoretic application of ACh? TTX has no effect on the response to ACh, but it does block the EPP. The reason the response to ACh is unaffected is clear, but many expect that if there is no effect here, there should be no effect on the EPP either. Tetrodotoxin does not affect the binding of acetylcholine to the receptors and therefore will not affect the response to direct application of ACh. However, tetrodotoxin will affect the ability of an action potential to be elicited in the motor axon. If an action potential cannot be elicited in the motor axon, it cannot cause the release of transmitter. Thus, tetrodotoxin would totally abolish the EPP. The block would not be due to a block of ACh receptors, but rather to a block of some step prior to the release of the transmitter.
Bernard Katz and his colleagues were pioneers in investigating mechanisms of synaptic transmission at the neuromuscular junction. They suggested that the channel opened by ACh was one that had equal permeability to both Na+ and K+. Because it was equally permeable to Na+ and K+, Katz suggested that, as a result of the opening of these channels, the membrane potential would move toward 0 mV. (A value of alpha in the GHK equation equal to one, which when substituted into the equation, yields a potential of about 0 mV.)
The experiment shown in the figure on the left tests that concept. The muscle cell has been penetrated with a recording electrode as well as another electrode that can be connected to a suitable source of potential in order to artificially change the membrane potential. Normally, the membrane potential is about -80 mV [Skeletal muscle cells have higher (more negative) resting potentials than most nerve cells.] Again, a small amount of curare is added so that the EPP is small. Katz noticed in these experiments that the size of the EPP changed dramatically depending upon the potential of the muscle cell. If the membrane potential is moved to 0 mV, no potential change is recorded whatsoever. If the membrane potential is made +30 mV, the EPP is inverted. So three different stimuli produce endplate potentials that are very different from each other.
The lack of a response when the potential is at 0 mV is particularly informative. Consider why no potential change is recorded. Presumably, the transmitter is being released and binding to the receptors. The simple explanation for a lack of potential change is that the potential at which the opening of ACh channels are trying to reach has already been achieved. If the membrane potential is made more positive than 0 mV, then the EPP is inverted. No matter what the potential, the change in permeability tends to move the membrane potential towards 0 mV! If the resting potential is more negative than 0 mV, there is an upward deflection. If it is more positive, there is a downward deflection. If it is already at 0 mV, there is no deflection.
This potential is also called the reversal potential, because it is the potential at which the sign of the synaptic potential reverses. The experiment indicates that, as a result of ACh binding to receptors, specific channels become equally permeable to Na+ and K+. This permeability change tends to move the membrane potential from wherever it is initially towards a new potential of 0 mV.
Why does the normal endplate potential never actually reach 0 mV? One reason is that the sequence of permeability changes that underlie the action potential "swamp out" the changes produced by the EPP. But even if an action potential was not triggered, the EPP still would not reach 0 mV. This is because the ACh channels are only a small fraction of the total number of channels in muscle fibers. The K+ channels that endow a muscle cell with its resting potential are present as well. Their job is to try to maintain the cell at the resting potential.
The channel opened by ACh is a member of a general class of channels called ligand-gated channels or ionotropic receptors. As illustrated in Figure 4.10, the transmitter binding site is part of the channel itself. As a result of transmitter binding to the receptor (generally two molecules are necessary), there is a conformational change in the protein allowing a pore region to open and ions to flow down their electrochemical gradients. Additional details of the channel are presented in Chapter 11.
Calcium is a key ion involved in the release of chemical transmitter substances. Bernard Katz and his colleagues examined its role using the skeletal nerve muscle synapse. Electrodes were placed near the presynaptic terminal to initiate an action potential in the terminal (Figure 5.1). The preparation was perfused with a solution free of calcium. In order to precisely control the delivery of calcium, another microelectrode was filled with calcium. Since Ca2+ is positively charged, it can be delivered to the vicinity of the synaptic terminal by briefly closing a switch connected to a battery in such a way that the positive pole forces minute amounts of calcium out of the electrode. In the absence of Ca2+ ejection, stimulation of the motor neuron produced no EPSP.
Just before the presynaptic axon was stimulated a second time, the switch was briefly closed to eject a small amount of calcium in the vicinity of the presynaptic terminal. A normal EPSP was recorded. The experiment was repeated a third time, but now the calcium ejection occurred after the presynaptic axon was stimulated. There was no EPSP. This experiment demonstrates that calcium must be present before or during the action potential in the presynaptic terminal. Based on this experiment and others like it, Katz and colleagues proposed the calcium hypothesis for chemical synaptic transmission.
The figure above illustrates some of the key features of the calcium hypothesis for chemical synaptic transmission at the neuromuscular junction, but this hypothesis is generally applicable to all chemical synapses in the nervous system. There are two parts to this hypothesis. First, the depolarization of the presynaptic terminal leads to an increase in Ca2+ permeability. Just as there are voltage-dependent Na+ and K+ channels, there are also voltage-dependent Ca2+ channels. The structure of the voltage-dependent channels is very similar to the structure of the voltage-dependent sodium channels. Indeed, just a few amino acids can make the difference between a channel being selectively permeable to calcium and one that is selectively permeable to sodium. The Ca2+ channel is normally closed, but if there is a depolarization of the membrane (caused by a presynaptic action potential), the channel opens and the opening of the channel allows calcium influx. The second part of the calcium hypothesis for chemical synaptic transmission involves the consequences of the Ca2+ influx. The opening of the Ca2+ channel allows for calcium to flow down its concentration gradient from the outside to the inside of the synaptic terminal. This influx leads to an increase in the concentration of the Ca2+ in the presynaptic terminal, which by interacting with proteins associated with synaptic vesicles leads to the release of the chemical transmitter substance.
How does the increase in the intracellular concentration of Ca2+ cause transmitter release? The answer to this question came from an experiment which initially seems unrelated to the issue. Using high amplification of the electrical recording system, Katz noticed small deflections that occurred spontaneously and randomly at a rate of about once every 50 msec (Panel A of the figure to the right).
Based on these considerations, Katz called these events miniature endplate potentials or MEPPs. They appeared very similar to endplate potentials, but they were only about 0.5 mV in amplitude compared to the 50 mV amplitude of the normal EPP. Katz suggested that MEPPs were due to the spontaneous and random release of ACh. This idea intuitively makes good sense. If there is an abundance of ACh in the presynaptic terminal, perhaps some will leak out and diffuse across the cleft, bind to ACh receptors, and produce a small potential change. ACh is likely to be spontaneously released occasionally because there is a basal level of calcium in the presynaptic terminal. Each vesicle actually contains enough transmitter to open about 1,000 individual ACh-sensitive channels. Therefore, because the MEPP is about 0.5 mV in amplitude, the opening of a single channel produces a potential of about 0.5 μV.
Katz suggested, as a result of the experiment illustrated in Figure 5.3, that the normal EPP is due to the summation effects of many vesicles being released at the same time. One vesicle produces a potential of about 0.5 mV. The release of 100 of those vesicles at the same time could produce a potential which is 100 times as great (50 mV).
The illustration below (Figure 5.4) shows one of these vesicles in the process of fusing with the membrane and releasing its contents into the synaptic cleft through a process called exocytosis. For illustrative purposes, each synaptic vesicle is shown to contain three molecules of transmitter. In reality, each vesicle contains about 10,000 molecules of transmitter. Vesicles ready to be released are found in a region near the presynaptic terminal membrane called the readily releasable pool. Newly synthesized vesicles are found in the storage or reserve pool. The process by which a vesicle migrates from the reserve pool to the readily releasable pool is called mobilization. After fusing with the membrane and releasing its contents, the membrane is recycled to form new synaptic vesicles. This process is called recycling. Additional details of this process are found in Chapter 10.
An experiment by Katz that further supported the quantal hypothesis for chemical synaptic transmission is shown above. The extracellular concentration of calcium was lowered to reduce the size of the evoked endplate potential. Because less Ca2+ is in the extracellular medium, less Ca2+ will be available to enter through the voltage-dependent Ca2+ channels. At the arrow, the electrical shock was delivered to the motor axon. Eight successive stimuli were delivered to the presynaptic terminal. EPSPs with stars are the miniature endplate potentials (MEPPs). Note that they are uncorrelated with the stimulus. The evoked endplate potentials are small and highly variable. Sometimes the EPP was 1.6 mV in amplitude; sometimes there was no EPP at all. Sometimes the EPP was 0.4 mV. Katz noticed that these amplitudes showed a specific kind of distribution. The smallest evoked responses were 0.4 mV. He called these responses "units". Other times he recorded EPPs that were about 0.8 mV and called such responses "doubles" because they were twice the unit, and sometimes responses were 1.6 mV. Figure 5.5 is a plot of the number of times an EPP of various amplitudes was observed. Katz noticed that the amplitude of the smallest EPP that could be evoked was the same amplitude (0.5 mV) as the amplitude of the MEPP.
Based on these results Katz proposed the quantal hypothesis for chemical synaptic transmission. An action potential in the presynaptic cell produces an influx of Ca2+which promotes the exocytosis of synaptic vesicles from the presynaptic terminal. There is a statistical variability in the amount of vesicles that can be released. When the extracellular calcium concentration is low, sometimes there is not enough calcium to release any vesicles. At other times, there is enough calcium to cause the release of one vesicle and other times two vesicles, or three vesicles, and so forth. Each peak is therefore an integral multiple of the next, indicating that these vesicles are released in a quantized fashion. With normal levels of calcium, there is sufficient influx of Ca2+to release about 100 vesicles, which produce an endplate potential (EPP) of about 50 mV.
One of the simplest behaviors mediated by the central nervous system is knee-jerk or stretch reflex. In response to a neurologist's hammer to the patella tendon, there is a reflex extension of the leg. Figure 6.1 illustrates the neurocircuitry that controls that reflex response. The stretch to the patella tendon stretches the extensor muscle. More specifically, it stretches a group of specific receptors known as muscle spindle receptors or simply stretch receptors.
The stretch elicits action potentials in the stretch receptors which then propagate over type 1A afferent fibers, the somata of which are located in the dorsal root ganglion. Processes of these sensory neurons then enter the spinal cord and make synaptic connections with two types of cells. First, a synaptic connection is formed with the extensor motor neuron located in the ventral horn of the spinal cord. As the result of synaptic activation of this motor neuron, action potentials are elicited in the motor neuron and propagate out the ventral roots, ultimately invading the terminal regions of the motor axon (i.e., the neuromuscular junction), causing release of acetylcholine, depolarization of the muscle cell, formation of an action potential in the muscle cell, and a subsequent contraction of the muscle.
The sensory neurons also make synaptic connections with another type of neuron in the spinal cord called an interneuron. Interneurons are so named because they are interposed between one type of neuron and another. The particular interneuron shown is an inhibitory interneuron. As a result of its activation through the process of synaptic transmission, action potentials are elicited in the interneuron. An action potential in the inhibitory neuron leads to the release of a chemical transmitter substance that inhibits the flexor motor neuron, thereby preventing an improper movement from occurring. This particular reflex is known as the monosynaptic stretch reflex because this reflex is mediated by a single excitatory synaptic relay in the central nervous system.
The figure at right illustrates how it is possible to experimentally examine some of the components of synaptic transmission in the reflex pathway that mediates the stretch reflex. Normally, the sensory neuron is activated by a stretch to the stretch receptor, but this process can be bypassed by injecting a depolarizing current into the sensory neuron. That stimulus initiates an action potential in the sensory neuron which leads to a change in the potential of the motor neuron. This potential is known as an excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP); excitatory because it tends to depolarize the cell, thereby tending to increase the probability of firing an action potential in the motor neuron and postsynaptic because it is a potential recorded on the postsynaptic side of the synapse.
The ionic mechanisms for the EPSP in the spinal motor neuron are essentially identical to the ionic mechanisms for the EPSP at the neuromuscular junction. Specifically, the transmitter substance diffuses across the synaptic cleft and binds to specific ionotropic receptors on the postsynaptic membrane, leading to a simultaneous increase in the sodium and potassium permeability (See Figure 4.10). The mechanisms for release are also identical to those at the neuromuscular junction. An action potential in the presynaptic terminal leads to the opening of voltage dependent Ca2+ channels, and the Ca2+ influx causes transmitter substance to be released.
There are two fundamental differences between the process of synaptic transmission at the sensorimotor synapse in the spinal cord and the process of synaptic transmission at the neuromuscular junction. First, transmitter substance released by the sensory neuron is not ACh but rather the amino acid glutamate. Indeed, there are many different transmitters in the central nervous system - up to 50 or more and the list grows every year. Fortunately, these 50 or more transmitter substances can be conveniently grouped into four basic categories: acetylcholine, monoamines, peptides, and the amino acids. Second, in contrast to the 50-mV amplitude of the synaptic potential at the neuromuscular junction, the amplitude of the synaptic potential in a spinal motor neuron, as a result of an action potential in a 1A afferent fiber, is only about 1 mV.
If the amplitude of the postsynaptic potential is only 1 mV, how can an action potential in the motor neuron be triggered and the reflex function? Note that a 1-mV EPSP is unlikely to be sufficient to drive the membrane potential of the motor neuron to threshold to fire a spike. If there is no spike, there will be no contraction of the muscle. The answer is that the stretch of the muscle fires multiple action potentials in many different stretch receptors. In fact, the greater the stretch, the greater is the probability of activating more stretch receptors. This process is referred to as recruitment. Therefore, multiple 1A afferents will converge onto the spinal motor neuron and participate in its activation. This is not the whole answer, however. Recall that the greater the intensity of the stimulus, the greater is the number of action potentials elicited in a sensory receptor. The greater the stretch, the greater the number of action potentials elicited in a single sensory neuron and the greater number of EPSPs produced in the motor neuron from that train of action potentials in the sensory cell. The processes by which the multiple EPSPs from presynaptic neurons summate over space and time are called temporal and spatial summation.
Temporal summation. A single action potential in sensory neuron 1 produces a 1-mV EPSP in the motor neuron. Now consider the consequences of firing two action potentials in quick succession (See figure above). Two EPPs are elicited, the second of which summates on the falling edge of the first. As a result of two action potentials, a summated potential about 2 mV in amplitude occurs. If there were three presynaptic action potentials, and they occurred rapidly enough, the total potential would be about 3 mV, and so forth. Temporal summation is strictly a passive property of nerve cells. Special ionic conductive mechanisms are not needed to explain it. The potentials summate because of the passive properties of the nerve cell membrane, specifically the ability of membranes to store charge. The membrane temporarily stores the charge of the first PSP and then the charge from the second PSP is added to it to produce a potential twice as large at first. This process of temporal summation is very much dependent upon the duration of the synaptic potential. The temporal summation occurs when the presynaptic action potentials occur in quick succession. The time frame is dependent upon the passive properties of the membrane, specifically the time constant.
Spatial summation. Now consider a motor neuron that receives two inputs. An action potential produced in sensory neuron 1 produces a 1-mV EPSP and a single action potential in sensory neuron 2 also produces a 1-mV EPSP. If action potentials are produced simultaneously in sensory neuron 1 and in sensory neuron 2, the EPSPs summate to produce a summated EPSP which is twice that of the individual EPSPs. Spatial summation in nerve cells occurs because of the space constant, the ability of a charge produced in one region of the cell to spread to other regions of the cell.
Whether a neuron fires in response to a synaptic input is dependent upon how many action potentials are being fired in any one afferent input, as well as how many individual afferent pathways are activated.
The decision to fire also depends on the presence of inhibitory synaptic inputs. Artificially depolarizing the interneuron to initiate an action potential produces a transient hyperpolarization of the membrane potential of the motor neuron (See Figure 6.2). The time course of this hyperpolarization looks very similar to that of an EPSP, but it is reversed in sign. The synaptic potential in the motor neuron is called an inhibitory postsynaptic potential (IPSP) because it tends to move the membrane potential away from the threshold, thereby decreasing the probability of this neuron initiating an action potential.
The membrane potential of the flexor motor neuron is about -65 mV, so one might predict that the IPSP would be due to an increase in the permeability or the conductance of an ion whose equilibrium potential is more negative than -65 mV. One possibility is potassium. Potassium does mediate some inhibitory synaptic potentials in the central nervous system, but not at the particular synapse between a spinal interneuron and spinal motor neuron. At this particular synapse, the IPSP is due to a selective increase in chloride permeability. Note that the equilibrium potential for chloride is about -70 mV. The transmitter released by the spinal interneuron binds to a special class of ionotropic receptors which are normally closed, but open and become selectively permeable to chloride ions as a result of the binding of the transmitter. As a result of the increase in Cl- permeability, the membrane potential moves from its resting value of -65 mV towards the Cl- equilibrium potential. (Note that in principle, decreasing the resting conductance of Na+ could also produce an IPSP.)
What about the transmitter substance that is released by the inhibitory interneuron in the spinal cord? The transmitter substance is glycine, an amino acid which is used frequently in the central nervous system as a transmitter that produces inhibitory actions. It is not the most common, however. The most common transmitter with inhibitory actions is gamma amino butyric acid (GABA).
In addition to the responses mediated by ionotropic receptors, there is an entirely separate class of synaptic potentials that have durations with orders of magnitude greater than the durations of the classical EPSPs. These are so-called slow synaptic potentials and they are mediated by metabotropic receptors. Slow synaptic potentials are not observed at every postsynaptic neuron but they are certainly observed at many. The figure below illustrates a postsynaptic neuron which receives two inputs. An action potential in neuron 1 produces an excitatory postsynaptic potential or EPSP in the postsynaptic cell whose duration is about 20 msec. Neuron 2 can also produce a postsynaptic potential but its duration is more than three orders of magnitude longer than that of the conventional type of synaptic potential. The mechanism of these slow synaptic responses involves changes in metabolism of the cell.
One mechanism for a slow synaptic potential is shown in the illustration at left (Figure 6.5) and in Figure 11.11. In contrast to the ionotropic receptor for which the receptors are actually part of the channel complex, the channels that produce the slow synaptic potentials are not directly coupled to the transmitter receptors. Rather, the receptors are separate from the channel. These receptors are known as metabotropic because they involve changes in the metabolism of the cell and, in general, changes in activation of specific second messenger systems. The figure at left illustrates an example of one type of response that involves the cyclic AMP cascade. Slow PSPs are in some cases mediated by cyclic AMP but they are also mediated by other protein kinases. For the response in Figure 6.5, the transmitter activates G proteins that lead to the increased synthesis of cyclic AMP. Cyclic AMP then leads to the activation of cyclic AMP-dependent kinase (PKA), which phosphorylates a channel protein or a component of the channel and then produces a conformational change in the channel and a change in its ionic permeability. In contrast to a direct conformational change produced by the binding of a transmitter to the receptor channel complex (seen in responses mediated by ionotropic receptors), the conformational change is produced by phosphorylation. The particular channel is one that is selectively permeable to K+ and is normally open. As a result of the channel phosphorylation by PKA, the channel closes and becomes less permeable to K+. Since the normal resting potential is due to a balance of Na+ and K+, decreasing the K+ conductance favors the effects of the Na+ conductance and a depolarization is produced.
It is interesting to point out that the activation of metabotropic receptors can produce effects which are much longer than several hundred seconds. For example, protein kinase A can diffuse in the nucleus where it can phosphorylate proteins (i.e., transcription factors) that regulate gene expression.
This chapter and the two previous ones have focused on chemical synaptic transmission. As you have seen for chemical synapses, there is a distinct cytoplasmic discontinuity that separates the presynaptic and postsynaptic membranes (Fig. 6.6A).
This discontinuity is known as the synaptic cleft. The presynaptic terminal of chemical synapses contains a high concentration of mitochondria and synaptic vesicles, and there is a characteristic thickening of the postsynaptic membrane. As a result of a depolarization or an action potential in the presynaptic terminal, chemical transmitters are released from the presynaptic terminal, which diffuse across the synaptic cleft and bind to receptor sites on the postsynaptic membrane. This leads to a permeability change that produces the postsynaptic potential. For chemical synapses, there is a delay (usually, approximately 0.5-1 ms in duration) between the initiation of an action potential in the presynaptic terminal and a potential change in the postsynaptic cell. The synaptic delay is due to the time necessary for transmitter to be released, diffuse across the cleft, and bind with receptors on the postsynaptic membrane. Chemical synaptic transmission is generally unidirectional. A potential change in the presynaptic cell releases transmitter that produces a postsynaptic potential, but a depolarization in the postsynaptic cell does not produce any effects in the presynaptic cell because no transmitter is released from the postsynaptic cell at the synaptic region. The most predominant type of synapse is the chemical synapse, and for that reason they have been the focus of this and the previous chapters.
However, another category of synapses are those associated with electrical synaptic transmission. Electrical synaptic transmission is mediated by specialized structures known as gap junctions (Fig. 6.6B), which provide a pathway for cytoplasmic continuity between the presynaptic and the postsynaptic cells. Consequently, a depolarization (or a hyperpolarization) produced in the presynaptic terminal produces a change in potential of the postsynaptic terminal, which is due to the direct ionic pathway between the cells. For electrical synapses, a minimal synaptic delay is present; as soon as a potential change is produced in the presynaptic terminal, a reflection of that potential change is produced in the postsynaptic cell. Electrical junctions are found in both the nervous system and between other excitable membranes, such as smooth muscle and cardiac muscle cells. In these muscle cells, they provide an important pathway for the propagation of action potentials from one muscle cell to another.
The discovery of certain toxins has greatly facilitated the analysis of voltage and chemically gated channels as well as the process of synaptic transmission. The following table illustrates some that have been particularly useful.
Historically, it was generally thought that the role of the synapse was to simply transfer information between one neuron and another neuron or between a neuron and a muscle cell. In addition, it was thought that these connections, once established during development, were relatively fixed in their strength, much like a solder joint between two electronic components. One exciting development in neurobiology over the past forty years is the realization that most synapses are extremely plastic; they are able to change their strength as a result of either their own activity or through activity in another pathway. Many think that this synaptic plasticity is central to understanding the mechanisms of learning and memory.
There are two general forms of synaptic plasticity, intrinsic and extrinsic. Intrinsic mechanisms, also known as homosynaptic mechanisms, refer to changes in the strength of a synapse that are brought about by its own activity. (Homo from the Greek meaning the same.) Extrinsic plasticity, or heterosynaptic plasticity, is a change in the strength of a synapse brought about by activity in another pathway.
Homosynaptic Plasticity. There are two types of intrinsic or homosynaptic plasticity, synaptic depression and synaptic facilitation. Synaptic depression and facilitation are not always found at the same synapse. Some synapses exhibit one but not the other, whereas some synapses exhibit both. Figure 7.1B illustrates homosynaptic plasticity at the synapse between a 1A afferent fiber and a spinal motor neuron. An action potential in the sensory neuron produces an EPSP in the motor neuron. A second action potential in the sensory neuron, 200 msec after the first, produces an EPSP that is smaller than that produced by the first action potential. This phenomenon is called synaptic depression. The efficacy of synaptic transmission is not constant; it varies depending upon the frequency of stimulation. The mechanisms of synaptic depression vary but one common mechanism is depletion of the available transmitter. The second of two action potentials will release less transmitter because less transmitter is available to be released. (See Figure 7.2A)
Figure 7.1C illustrates the second form of homosynaptic plasticity, synaptic facilitation. This particular example is known as paired-pulse or twin-pulse facilitation. Two action potentials in the presynaptic cell produce two EPSPs in the postsynaptic cell. The first action potential produces a 1 mV EPSP, but the second action potential, which occurs about 20 msec after the first, produces an EPSP that is larger than the EPSP produced by the first. In this example, it is twice as large as the first one. This doubling of the EPSP represents the synaptic facilitation. The net EPSP is 3 mV. Through the process of temporal summation the second EPSP (2 mV) adds to the amplitude of the first EPSP (1 mV).
One mechanism contributing to twin pulse facilitation is residual calcium. An action potential leads to the opening of Ca2+ channels and the influx of Ca2+, which leads to the release of transmitter. Now consider the fate of the calcium after the first action potential (Figure 7.2B). Ca2+ levels will decline back to their initial level, but this recovery will not occur instantaneously. Thus, if a second action potential is initiated at a time during which the calcium has not yet recovered to its basal level, the calcium influx associated with the second spike will add to the "residual calcium" that is left over from the first. The net effect is that the total concentration of calcium will be greater after the second spike than it was after the first, and more transmitter will be released.
Another intrinsic type of synaptic plasticity is called post-tetanic potentiation (PTP). It is an extreme example of facilitation defined as a relatively persistent (minutes) enhancement of synaptic strength following a brief train of spikes (a tetanus).
Just as there are two types of homosynaptic plasticity, there are two types of heterosynaptic plasticity. Before discussing heterosynaptic plasticity, it is useful to review the types of synapses that are present in the central nervous system. Three broad categories of synapses are found in the central nervous system. (See also Chapter 8)
Axosomatic synapses are synapses that are made onto the soma or cell body of a neuron.
Axodendritic synapses, probably the most prominent kind of synapses, are synapses that one neuron makes onto the dendrite of another neuron.
Axoaxonic synapses are synapses made by one neuron onto the synapse of another neuron. Axoaxonic synapses mediate presynaptic inhibition and presynaptic facilitation.
The phenomenon complementary to presynaptic inhibition is presynaptic facilitation. M1 is capable of increasing the strength of the synaptic pathway. As a result of the activation of a second messenger cascade by M1, an action potential in the presynaptic terminal leads to a greater amount of Ca2+ influx, and therefore more transmitter is released.
A very enduring form of synaptic plasticity is called long-term potentiation (LTP). It can have both homosynaptic and heterosynaptic components. An electric shock (test stimulus) to afferent fibers produces an EPSP (Figure 7.6). If the pathway is repeatedly stimulated (e.g., every minute), the amplitude of EPSP is constant.  A tetanus produces post-tetanic potentiation (PTP) that dies away after several minutes. What is left is a very enduring enhancement of the EPSP. There is excitement about LTP because it is the kind of mechanism necessary to store memory (Figure 7.7).
The NMDA-type receptor is critical for some forms of LTP, in particular LTP at the CA3-CA1 synapse in the hippocampus. The postsynaptic spines of CA1 neurons have two types of glutamate receptors; NMDA-type glutamate receptors and the AMPA-type glutamate receptors (Figure 7.8). Both receptors are permeable to Na+ and K+, but the NMDA-type has two additional features.
First, in addition to being permeable to Na+, it also has a significant permeability to Ca2+.
Second, this channel is normally blocked by Mg2+
Even if glutamate binds to the channel and produces a conformational change, there is no efflux of K+ or influx of Na+ or Ca2+ because it is "plugged up" by the Mg2+ (Figure 7.8A). Thus, a weak test stimulus will not open this channel because it is blocked by Mg2. A weak test stimulus will produce an EPSP, but that EPSP will be mediated by the AMPA receptor.
Now consider the consequences of a tetanus (Figure 7.8B). Because of the tetanus, there will be spatial and temporal summation of the EPSPs produced by the multiple afferent synapses on the common postsynaptic cell (Figure 7.6). Consequently, the membrane potential of the postsynaptic neuron will become very depolarized. Because the inside of the cell becomes positive, the positively charged Mg2+ is "thrust" out of the channel (Figure 7.8B). Ca2+ then enters the spine through the NMDA receptor. That Ca2+ activates various protein kinases, which then trigger long-term changes in synaptic strength.  One of the long-term changes involves the insertion of additional AMPA receptors (Figure 7.8C).  Consequently, the glutamate released by a test stimulus after a LTP-inducing tetanus will open a greater number of channels and thereby produce a larger (potentiated) EPSP (Figure 7.8C).  In addition to an increase in the number of postsynaptic AMPA receptors, there is evidence that a greater amount of transmitter is released from the presynaptic neurons.  The combination of the presynaptic and postsynaptic effects would act synergistically to increase the size of the synaptic potential in the postsynaptic neuron.
A given postsynaptic neuron receives synaptic input from a number of different sources. There are the traditional type of axosomatic and axodendritic synapses. These can be either excitatory or inhibitory. In addition, the synaptic responses can be mediated by both ionotropic and metabotropic receptors. The presynaptic cells can be modulated through presynaptic inhibition and presynaptic facilitation. Consider that any one postsynaptic cell makes and receives 10,000 connections with other cells and that this module can be recapitulated in each of the billions of cells in the nervous system. It is this enormous pattern of synaptic connections and the plasticity that occurs at each one of these synapses which makes the nervous system so extraordinary.
It is very difficult to overestimate the importance of synaptic transmission. It is critical to the basic functioning of the nervous system and appears to be critical in learning and memory. Also, changes in synaptic transmission seem to be central to understanding a number of neurological disorders such as myasthenia gravis and Parkinson's disease. Synaptic transmission is central to understanding mental diseases such as schizophrenia, anxiety, and depression. A major theme of neuroscience is to identify the specific transmitter systems involved in these brain diseases and design appropriate interventions. Finally, most of the psychoactive drugs function by affecting some aspects of synaptic transmission.
The human nervous system is estimated to consist of roughly 360 billion non-neural glial cells and 90 billion nerve cells. Furthermore, there are hundreds of different types of neurons based on morphology alone. Often, neurons that look similar have strikingly different properties. For example, they utilize and respond to different neurotransmitter(s). This section reviews the cellular components of nervous tissue. Students should be able to describe neurons and glia, their morphological components as seen with the light and electron microscope, and some of the fundamental functional roles these cell types play in the nervous system.
The region of the neuron containing the nucleus is known as the cell body, soma, or perikaryon (Figure 8.2). The cell body is the metabolic center of the neuron.
The interior of the soma consists of cytoplasm, a gel within a microtrabecular lattice formed by the microtubules and associated proteins that make up the cytoskeleton.
Energy producing metabolism and the synthesis of the macromolecules used by the cell to maintain its structure and execute its function are the principal activities of the neuronal soma. As described in Chapter 6, it also acts as a receptive area for synaptic inputs from other cells. Embedded within the neuronal cytoplasm are the organelles common to other cells, the nucleus, nucleolus, endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus, mitochondria, ribosomes, lysosomes, endosomes, and peroxisomes. Many of these cell inclusions are responsible for the expression of genetic information controlling the synthesis of cellular proteins involved in energy production, growth, and replacement of materials lost by attrition.
The membrane of the neuron functions as a receptive surface over its entire extent; however, specific inputs (termed afferents) from other cells are received primarily on the surface of the cell body and on the surface of the specialized processes known as dendrites. The dendritic processes may branch extensively and are often covered with projections known as dendritic spines. Spines provide a tremendous increase in the surface area available for synaptic contacts. The dendritic processes and spines of neurons are essentially expansions of cytoplasm containing most of the organelles found in the cell body. Dendrites contain numerous orderly arrays of microtubules and fewer neurofilaments (see below). The microtubule associated proteins (MAPs) in the dendrite have a higher molecular weight than those found in the axon. An example is MAP2. In addition, microtubules in dendrites have their positive ends toward the cell soma. Mitochondria are often arranged longitudinally. Rough endoplasmic reticulum and ribosomes are present in large but not small dendrites. The shape and extent of the "dendritic tree" of an individual neuron is indicative of the quantity and variety of information received and processed by that neuron. The dendritic spines often contain microfilaments which is the cytoskeletal element responsible for changes in spine shape observed in some examples of synaptic plasticity.
Information is received by the dendrite through an array of receptors on dendrite surface that react to transmitters released from the axon terminals of other neurons. Dendrites may consist of a single twig-like extension from the soma or a multi-branched network capable of receiving inputs from thousands of other cells. For instance, an average spinal motor neuron with a moderate-sized dendritic tree, receives 10,000 contacts, with 2,000 of these on the soma and 8,000 on the dendrites.
The cone-shaped region of the cell body where the axon originates is termed the axon hillock. This area is free of ribosomes and most other cell organelles, with the exception of cytoskeletal elements and organelles that are being transported down the axon. The neurofilaments in the axon hillock become clustered together as fascicles. The region between the axon hillock and the beginning of the myelin sheath is known as the initial segment. In many cases, this region is the anatomical location for the initiation of the action potential. The area under the axolemma in this region has material that stains darkly when viewed by EM. This region is shown in Figure 8.4. At the distal-most end of the axon and its collaterales are small branches whose tips are button-shaped cytoplasmic enlargements called terminal boutons or nerve endings.
The cone-shaped region of the cell body where the axon originates is termed the axon hillock. This area is free of ribosomes and most other cell organelles, with the exception of cytoskeletal elements and organelles that are being transported down the axon. The neurofilaments in the axon hillock become clustered together as fascicles. The region between the axon hillock and the beginning of the myelin sheath is known as the initial segment. In many cases, this region is the anatomical location for the initiation of the action potential. The area under the axolemma in this region has material that stains darkly when viewed by EM. This region is shown in Figure 8.4. At the distal-most end of the axon and its collaterales are small branches whose tips are button-shaped cytoplasmic enlargements called terminal boutons or nerve endings.
The part of the plasma membrane of the nerve ending that is specialized to form functional contacts with other cells is the synapse.
When neurons interact with muscle fibers, the region of functional contact is called the neuromuscular junction or motor endplate (Chapter 4). According to the classical definition of synapse, when a nerve ending synapses on a dendrite or soma of a second neuron it is termed either an axodendritic or an axosomatic synapse, respectively (Chapter 7). However, almost all possible combinations of pre- and postsynaptic elements have been found in the central nervous system. These different types of synapse are designated by combining the name of the structure of the presynaptic element with that of the postsynaptic structure. For example, when the transfer of information occurs from an axon to axon or from one terminal to another, the synapse involved is called an axoaxonic synapse.
Regions of functional contacts between neurons (synapses) have distinct morphological characteristics. Although a great deal of variation exists in the size and shape of boutons of individual neurons, synapses can be identified by the presence of the following:
A presynaptic complement of membrane-bound synaptic vesicles exists. These are spherical vesicles in excitatory nerve endings, shown in Figure 8.6. In inhibitory neurons the synaptic vesicle are often flattened as shown in Figure 8.7.
The nerve ending often has aggregations of dense material in the cytoplasm immediately adjacent to the membrane on the pre- and postsynaptic side of the junction (these are known as presynaptic density or postsynaptic density, respectively.) This dense material on the presynaptic side is thought to be the site of vesicle attachment. The dense material on the postsynaptic side is a site where receptor proteins and channels are prevalent.
Many mitochondria are present, especially in the nerve terminal; and
There is a distinct synaptic cleft or intercellular space of approximately 20-40 nm.
An endoplasmic reticulum is present that regulates Ca2+ level.
Endosomal membrane that functions in the recycling of synaptic vesicles.
Numerous variations of the "model" neuron described above exist. An important modification, which occurs especially in receptor neurons, involves the designation of a neuronal process as a dendrite or as an axon. Classically, the axon has been identified as the myelinated or unmyelinated process that transmits signals away from the cell body. The classical view of the dendrite is that of an unmyelinated tube of cytoplasm which carries information toward the cell body. However, this distinction does not hold for ALL neurons. Some cells have a myelinated process that transmits signals toward the cell body. Morphologically the "dendrite" and the "axon" may, therefore, be indistinguishable. Neither the position of the cell body nor the presence or absence of myelin is always a useful criterion for understanding the orientation of the neuron. The region of impulse initiation is more reliable guide to understanding the functional focal point of the cell. This region is analogous to the initial segment of the model neuron, discussed above. Routinely the fiber or process, which contains the initial segment or trigger zone, is referred to as an axon. Note, as shown in Figure 8.8, the trigger zone does not have to be immediately adjacent to the cell body.
A number of conventions have evolved to classify and name neurons. One of the oldest, devised by Golgi in the late 1800’s, is based on the complexity of the dendritic tree of the neuron. Through this approach cells are classified as unipolar, bipolar and multipolar neurons as shown in Figure 8.8. Unipolar cells have only one cell process, and are primarily found in invertebrates. However, vertebrate sensory neurons are another form of this type of cell. Because these cells start out developmentally as bipolar neurons and then become unipolar as they mature, they are called pseudo-unipolar cells. Bipolar cells are present in the retina and the olfactory bulb. Multipolar cells make up the remainder of neuronal types and are, consequently, the most numerous type. These have been further sub-categorized into Golgi type II cells that are small neurons, usually interneurons, and Golgi type I cells that are large multipolar neurons.
Cells are also named for their shape (e.g., pyramidal cells shown in Figure 8.9) or for the person who first described them (e.g., Purkinje cells shown in Figure 8.10). More recently, cells have been named for their function or the neurotransmitter they contain (e.g., CNS norepinephrine cell groups covered in Chapter 12). This description is possible because of the development of histochemical and immunocytochemical methods to specifically identify the neurotransmitter type used by neurons.
Many of the terms used in this section are defined below.
Axolemma is the plasmalemma of the axon.
Endoplasmic reticulum is a labyrinthine, membrane bounded compartment in the cytoplasm where lipids are synthesized and membrane bound proteins are made. In some regions of the neuron ER is devoid of ribosomes and is termed smooth ER. The smooth ER is involved in Ca2+ buffering and in the biosynthesis and recycling of synaptic vesicles as will be discussed in Chapter 10.
Endosome is a membrane-bounded organelle that carries materials ingested by endocytosis and passes them to lysosomes and peroxisomes for degradation. It also functions in the nerve ending to recycle synaptic vesicles.
Golgi apparatus is a collection of stacked, smooth-surfaced membrane bound organelles where proteins and lipids made in the endoplasmic reticulum are modified and sorted.
Lysosomes contain enzymes that digest compounds that originate inside or outside the cells. They are involved in converting proteins to amino acids and glycogen to glucose, the basic nutrient of neurons. Their enzymes act at an acidic pH. As will be described later, they also serve as vesicles for reverse transport from axon terminals to the soma. Many lysosomes become degraded to lipofuscin granules, which accumulate as the organism ages and are regarded as neuronal refuse. Lysosomes form from the budding off the Golgi apparatus. They have a variety of membrane-bound shapes and sizes, ranging in size between 250 and 700 nm in diameter.
Microfilaments are 7 nm in diameter filaments arranged as a paired helix of two strands of globular actin. Microfilaments are especially prominent in synaptic terminals, in dendritic spines, and in association with the axolemma.
Microtubules are 20 to 25 nm diameter tubular structures that run in loose bundles around the nucleus and funnel into the base of the axonal and dendritic processes where they form parallel arrays distributed longitudinally. They are made up of dimers of α and β tubulin subunits and contain associated proteins known as microtubule associated proteins (MAPS). The MAPS regulate the polymerization of tubulin subunits to form the microtubules. The dimers of α and β tubulin subunits polymerize to form proto-filaments arranged in an a helix such that 13 dimer subunits make up each full turn of the a helix. In addition, microtubules are not continuous, and each microtubule is composed of numerous 100 nm units. Microtubules are involved in axoplasmic transport (see below).
Mitochondria are distributed ubiquitously throughout the cytoplasm of the entire nerve cell and are especially plentiful at presynaptic specializations.
Neurofilaments are a type of intermediate filament found in nerve cells. Neurofilaments are involved in the maintenance of the neuron's shape and mechanical strength. Although neuronal neurofilaments are classified as intermediate filaments, their composition in neurons is different than that found in other cells. They are composed of three subunits that are arranged to form a 10-nm diameter tubule. It is the neurofilament that stains with heavy metal to permit the visualization of neuronal shape. Neurofilaments run in loose bundles around the cell nucleus and other organelles and funnel into the base of the axonal and dendritic processes where they form parallel arrays distributed longitudinally. Neurofilaments are more abundant than microtubules in axons, whereas microtubules are more abundant than neurofilaments in dendrites. It is the neurofilaments that undergo modification in the Alzheimer's disease to form neurofibrillary tangles.
Nucleolus is in the center of the nuclei of all neurons. It is a prominent, deeply stained spherical inclusion about one-third the size of the nucleus. The nucleolus synthesizes ribosomal RNA, which has a major role in protein synthesis.
Nucleus of the neuron is large and round and is usually centrally located. In some cells, masses of deeply staining chromatin are visible in the nucleus. The nuclear membrane of neurons is like that of other cells - a double membrane punctuated by pores (nuclear pores) which are involved in nuclear-cytoplasmic interactions. The nucleus in neurons is spherical and ranges in diameter from 3 to 18 micrometers depending on the size of the neuron. Neurons with long axons have a larger cell body and nucleus. As in other cells, the principal component of the nucleus is deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), the substance of the chromosomes and genes.
Peroxisomes are small membrane bounded organelles that use molecular oxygen to oxidize organic molecules. They contain some enzymes that either produce or degrade hydrogen peroxide.
Plasmalemma of the neuron appears in the electron microscope as a typical bi-layered cellular membrane, approximately 10 nm thick.
Postsynaptic density is darkly staining material of postsynaptic cell adjacent to the synapse. Receptors, ion channels, and other signaling molecules are likely bound to this material.
Presynaptic density is the region of darkly staining material of the presynaptic membrane where synaptic vesicles are hypothesized to dock prior to fusion with the presynaptic membrane.
Ribosomes are particles composed of ribosomal RNA and ribosomal protein which associate with mRNA and catalyze the synthesis of proteins. When ribosomes are attached to the outer membranes of the ER, the organelle is termed rough ER. The rough ER, in laminae with interspersed ribosomes, is visible with the light microscope as Nissl substance. In light microscopic preparations, the appearance of Nissl substance varies in different types of neurons. It may appear as densely stained ovoids or as finely dispersed particles or aggregations of granules.
Synapse is the junction that allows signals to pass from a nerve cell to another cell or from one nerve cell to a muscle cell. The synaptic cleft is the gap between the membrane of the pre- and postsynaptic cell. In a chemical synapse the signal is carried by a diffusable neurotransmitter. The cleft between the presynaptic cell and the postsynaptic cells is 20 to 40 nm wide and may appear clear or striated. Recent studies have indicated that the cleft is not an empty space per se, but is filled with carbohydrate-containing material.
Synaptic vesicles are small spherical organelles in the cytoplasm of neurons that contain neurotransmitter and various proteins necessary for neurotransmitter secretion. Vesicles containing inhibitory neurotransmitter are often flat or elliptical whereas vesicles that contain excitatory neurotransmitter are usually more spherical.
The most numerous cellular constituents of the central nervous system are the non-neuronal, neuroglial ("nerve glue") cells that occupy the space between neurons. It has been estimated that there are roughly 360 billion glial cells, which comprise 80-90% of the cells in the CNS. This section will cover the general classifications of the neuroglial cells and describe some of the general properties that distinguish neuroglia from neurons.
Neuroglia differ from neurons in several general ways in that they
do not form synapses,
have essentially only one type of process,
retain the ability to divide, and
are less electrically excitable than neurons.
Neuroglia are classified based on size and shape fo their nucleus and distinguished from neurons, at the light microscopic level. Alkaline (basic) dyes are used to show nuclear morphology. In addition, several metal stains are used show the shape of the cell and cytoplasmic architecture. Characteristics of nuclei, including size, shape, staining intensity, and distribution of chromatin, are used to distinguish cell types in pathological material. Cell body characteristics, including size, shape, location, branching pattern, and density of processes, are also used.
Neuroglia are divided into two major categories based on size, the macroglia and the microglia. The macroglia are of ectodermal origin and consist of astrocytes, oligodendrocytes and ependymal cells. Microglia cells are probably of mesodermal origin. A comparison of the various neuroglial types is shown in Figure.
There are three types of macroglia: Oligodendroglia, Ependyma, and Astrocytes. This section discusses the two types of astrocytes: Protoplasmic and Fibrous.
Protoplasmic astrocytes are found primarily in gray matter. With silver or glial specific stains, their cell bodies and processes are very irregular. The processes may be large or very fine, sometimes forming sheets that run between axons and dendrites, and may even surround synapses. These fine sheet-like processes give the protoplasmic astrocyte cell body a "fuzzy" or murky appearance under the light microscope. Bundles of fine fibrils may be seen within the cytoplasm. The nucleus of a protoplasmic astrocyte is ellipsoid or bean-shaped with characteristic flecks of chromatin. Specific types of intercellular junctions have been noted between the processes of protoplasmic astrocytes. These probably mediate ion exchange between cells.
Fibrous astrocytes are found primarily in white matter, have a smoother cell body contour than do protoplasmic astrocytes as seen with glial-specific stains, and have processes that tend to emerge from the cell body radially. These processes are narrower and branch to form end feet on blood vessels, ependyma, and pia. Consequently, the processes of fibrous astrocytes do not form sheets and do not tend to conform to the shape of the surrounding neurons or vascular elements. The major distinguishing feature of fibrous astrocytes, as the name suggests, is an abundance of glial fibrils arranged in parallel arrays in the cytoplasm and extending into the processes.
In Nissl stains, the fibrous astrocytes have a nucleus essentially the same as that of the protoplasmic type with a flecked appearance. Intercellular adherences have also been observed between fibrous astrocytes.
Both types of astrocytes function to support the neurons in their immediate vicinity. They provide a physical barrier between cells, maintain the ionic and pH equilibrium of the extracellular space around neurons, and continually modify the chemical environment of the neighboring cells. As shown in Figure 8.14, astrocytes form a complete lining around the external surface of the CNS (glial limitans) and around blood vessels (perivascular feet). During development, they form scaffolding along which nerve cells migrate to achieve their mature structure. During injury, the astrocytes proliferate and phagocytize dead cells. This often leads to the formation of glial scar.
In addition to these general functions, astrocytes also act in more specialized ways to facilitate neuron function. They metabolize neurotransmitters by removing them from the synaptic cleft. For example, the amino acid glutamate is taken up by astrocytes and inactivated by conversion to glutamine. Glutamine is then transported to the neuron to be re-synthesized into glutamate (see Chapter 13). More recent evidence indicates that the astrocytes can dramatically change size as part of their physiological regulation of the neuronal environment. These functions will be discussed in later sections.
Oligodendrocytes are also located in both gray and white matter. They are the predominant cell type in white matter where they are often located as rows of cells between groups of neuronal processes. These are termed interfascicular oligodendroglia and are involved in the formation and maintenance of the myelin surrounding the neuronal processes nearby. In gray matter, oligodendroglia are usually located near neurons and, therefore, are known as perineuronal satellite cells. Cell bodies of oligodendroglia are often located near capillaries, but they lack the definite perivascular end feet characteristic of astrocytes.
The processes of oligodendrocytes are fewer and more delicate than astrocytes, and the cell body shape is polygonal to spherical. The oligodendrocyte nucleus is smaller than that of the astrocyte, is eccentrically located in the cell body, contains clumps of chromatin and can be stained by alkaline dyes. The cytoplasm of oligodendrocytes tends to be darker than that of astrocytes with silver stains, and does not contain glial fibrils (although they do contain microtubules).
Oligodendrocytes are also located in both gray and white matter. They are the predominant cell type in white matter where they are often located as rows of cells between groups of neuronal processes. These are termed interfascicular oligodendroglia and are involved in the formation and maintenance of the myelin surrounding the neuronal processes nearby. In gray matter, oligodendroglia are usually located near neurons and, therefore, are known as perineuronal satellite cells. Cell bodies of oligodendroglia are often located near capillaries, but they lack the definite perivascular end feet characteristic of astrocytes.
The processes of oligodendrocytes are fewer and more delicate than astrocytes, and the cell body shape is polygonal to spherical. The oligodendrocyte nucleus is smaller than that of the astrocyte, is eccentrically located in the cell body, contains clumps of chromatin and can be stained by alkaline dyes. The cytoplasm of oligodendrocytes tends to be darker than that of astrocytes with silver stains, and does not contain glial fibrils (although they do contain microtubules).
In the Peripheral Nervous System (PNS), Schwann cells are responsible for the myelin formation. These cells myelinate axons differently than the interfascicular oligodendroglia. As shown in Figure 8.16, they migrate around the axon, laying a membrane covering around the axon by squeezing out the cytoplasm of the Schwann cell. Also, every internode of a PNS axon represents a single Schwann cell. In addition unmyelinated axons in the PNS are also enclosed by membranes formed by Schwann cells.
Ependymal cells are derived from the early germinal epithelium lining the lumen of the neural tube and thus are also ectodermal derivatives (along with neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes). Ependymal cells line the ventricles of the brain and the central canal of the spinal cord. They are arranged in a single-layered columnar epithelium, and have many of the histological characteristics of simple epithelium, which vary from squamous to cuboidal depending upon their location. The ependyma forming the ventricular lining do not connect to a basal lamina, but rest directly upon underlying nervous tissue. As shown in Figure 8.17, the surface facing the ventricle contains many microvilli and cilia. These cilia move cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) in the ventricles. The lateral borders of the ependymal cells are relatively straight and form junctions with adjacent cells.
Ependymal cells are modified in various regions of the ventricles into layers of cuboidal epithelium, which do lie on a basement membrane (formed by an outgrowth of the pia) over a rich bed of vasculature and connective tissue. This is the choroid plexus studied in the Laboratory that is responsible for the secretion, uptake and transport of substances to and from the CSF.
Microglia, in contrast to the other types of glial cells, originate from embryonic mesoderm. They are present throughout the central nervous system, but tend to be inconspicuous in mature normal tissue and are difficult to identify with the light or electron microscope. They are more abundant in gray matter, and may compromise up to 5-10% of the neuroglia in the cerebral cortex.
The general appearance of microglia is similar to oligodendrocytes, although they are smaller and have undulating processes with spine-like projections. Microglial nuclei are elongated or triangular and stain deeply with alkaline dyes.
Following damage to nervous tissue, microglia proliferate and migrate to the site of injury where they clear cellular debris by phagocytosis. The reacting microglia have a swollen form with shortened processes and are difficult to discriminate from phagocytes from the periphery or migrating perivascular cells. It is estimated that at least one third of the phagocytes appearing in the area of a lesion are of CNS origin.
Perhaps the most remarkable feature of the nervous system is the accuracy of its synaptic connections. The networks of circuits formed by neuronal interactions are responsible for the generation of behavior. Synapse formation is finely regulated. It involves processes at the cellular and subcellular levels, which result in: axons finding their appropriate targets from an array of choices; synapses being formed on the correct cellular compartment; and formation of pre- and postsynaptic specializations that allow for efficient information transfer.
We will discuss the following topics:
Axon Pathfinding – how axons find their way to specific targets.
guidance forces – forces that are produced by guidance molecules.
guidance molecules – proteins that help with axonal guidance.
Target recognition – how do axons "know" they have found the correct target?
One general property of neurons is that they migrate from the sites at which they begin to differentiate to their final residence in the nervous system.
Some neurons migrate to these final positions before they extend processes (e.g., motor neurons).
Other neurons extend axons as they migrate (e.g., cerebellar granule neurons).
Granule cells in the developing cerebellum migrate long distances along the processes of radial glial cells; this migration begins in the external granule layer and ends at the granule cell layer. For example, epithelial cells at the luminal surface of the neural tube proliferate to give rise to neuroblasts; some neuroblasts become radial glial cells and extend their processes from the luminal to pial surface. During the development of the cerebellum, granule neurons migrate through the molecular layer along the processes of radial glial cells. A number of neurological mutants have provided invaluable information about neuronal migration. For example, in the "weaver" mutant mouse the genetic defect is in granule neurons and not radial glia. In weaver, the granule cells are not able to migrate to their normal position below the Purkinje cell layer. This defect results in abnormal synaptic circuitry and impaired motor behavior. Once neurons have migrated to their final position, and sometimes before, they begin to extend axons. Neurons extend axons because of a specialized structure at the end of axons called growth cones. Granule cells in the developing cerebellum migrate long distances along the processes of radial glial cells. This migration begins in the external granule layer and ends at the granule cell layer. 
Neurons differentiate from multipotent stem cells and migrate to their final residence in the nervous system. When these neurons reach their residence, they extend an axon and dendrites to send and receive (respectively) information from other neurons. In general, dendrites remain relatively close to the cell body of the neuron, whereas axons may travel long distances to enable interneuronal communication.
Since axons may travel long distances and must search out their target from among many possibilities, the growing end of the axon, or growth cone, must have a mechanism to sense its surroundings.
The distal tip of a growing axon is called the growth cone. Actin is highly concentrated in both the lamellipodia and the finger-like extensions (filopodia). Although the direction of growth cone movement is influenced by the extracellular environment, the growth cone itself possesses intrinsic mechanisms that enable forward movement. Actin is polymerized at the leading edge of the growth cone and moved towards the rear where is it depolymerized. This continuous cycling movement of polymerized actin away from the leading edge towards the rear and the movement of actin monomer to the leading edge again generates a "tank-tread" type of movement. If this actin-based movement is linked to the substrate on which the growth cone is moving, the "tank-tread" movement is endowed with traction and growth cone movement ensues.
Ramón y Cajal first described growth cones and observed that they move in a circuitous route towards their targets. This observation suggested that the growth cones play an active role in the pathfinding process. Roger Sperry later showed that after lesions of the optic nerve in the frog, retinotectal axons regenerate, find their targets, and make synaptic connections with precision. Based on these observations, Sperry suggested the existence of surface markers that are used by the growth cones for pathway and target recognition. Later studies in grasshopper embryo, Drosophila, chick, and zebrafish showed that growth cones follow specific pathways in a variety of species. Since axon pathfinding is similar in disparate species, the mechanisms underlying axon guidance are likely conserved. Understanding the cellular and molecular mechanisms that determine the guidance of growing axons is important because it underlies the initial wiring of the nervous system, but also because it is necessary if there is to be regeneration of function after injury.
Axonal growth cones serve to sense environmental cues and direct the movement of axons in their quest to make synapses with their targets. Guidance cues are necessary to control the growth of axons for long distances to precise destinations. The molecular mechanisms by which these cues act probably involve altering the rate or location of actin polymerization by acting on receptors on the growth cone surface, that are linked to intracellular signaling cascades.
Axonal trajectories appear to be broken up into a series of smaller movements. The axon finds intermediate targets that act as choice points. Axons slow and transform their morphology at these points, and apparently look for another round of directions. Pioneering growth cones (the growth cones on initial axons that are later joined by other axons to create a large axon bundle) are thought to be influenced by these intermediate targets (called guidepost cells in insects). The pioneering growth cones are also influenced by other cues such that the intermediate targets exert only one of a number of influences on the path of growing axons.
The bundling together of axons into tracts is called fasciculation. Axonal fasciculation is also a guidance cue as segments of some axonal trajectories migrate along preexisting axon tracts. Thus, axons may follow the pathways laid down by the pioneering axons, although there is some selectivity. An axon may pass a number of axon tracts and make specific choices about which of these axon tracts to follow. It is not yet clear whether the pioneer cells are absolutely required for pathfinding in follower cells. If pioneer cells are not present, the follower cells are more prone to make pathfinding errors, although these errors are largely corrected and the axons find their targets.
Guidepost cells and preexisting axons can affect the outgrowth of developing axons. In addition to these influences, axons also receive long-range guidance information. This short- or long-range guidance information can be attractive or repulsive and serves to push or pull the growth cone in the correct direction towards its target.
Short-range guidance mechanisms, like the interaction with guidepost cells and fasciculation, involve contact-mediated detection by the growth cone filopodia. This contact may be attractive or repulsive. Long- range, diffusable factors may also influence axonal guidance by both attraction and repulsion. It is likely that axons are affected by both local and long-range forces acting simultaneously.
Axonal projections are often topographically organized, such that neighboring neurons in the region of origin project to neighboring neurons in the target region (e.g., retinal ganglion cells project topographically onto neurons in the superior colliculus). This organization presents further complexity to the rules of axon outgrowth and raises the question of how the topographic information is encoded. The original experiments of Roger Sperry and later work by many other laboratories has led to the notion that positional information is found at the level of the target region. What is this positional information? One possibility is that each axon has a label that corresponds to an identical label on its appropriate target, allowing specificity of connections. This seems unpractical; there would need to be a very large number of labels, and there is no clear targeting mechanism for the axons. A more likely option was suggested by Sperry in his Chemoaffinity Hypothesis that suggests that positional information is encoded in the form of gradients of signaling molecules at the target which would be detected by complementary gradients of receptors on the axons. This model implies that positional information can be encoded by a small number of molecules and that this information can be "read" by axons as they maneuver in the target region. This chemotropic guidance of axons by diffusable factors that are secreted by cells can involve attractive or repulsive forces.
Short- and long-range cues act to guide axon growth. These guidance effects can be attractive or repulsive. Axons may use several, or all, of these forces for navigation of single segments of movement. For example, a repellent from behind will "push" an axon into a corridor marked by permissive local cues and bounded by repulsive factors, while an attractant at the end of the corridor may "pull" the axon toward its target. After it was clear that these types of forces work to direct axon growth, attention turned to identifying the molecules that mediate these guidance effects.
In the past ten years, some of the molecules on the surface of neurons and the substrates on which they grow have been identified. Many of the molecules are responsible for general adhesive interactions between a growth cone and its environment, and others help in choosing which surfaces axons grow on.
Many of the molecules involved in adhesion are glycoproteins and belong to three major families of proteins:
The immunoglobulin (Ig) superfamily; one major member of this family is the neuronal cell adhesion molecules or N-CAMs (their adhesion properties are Ca2+-independent). There are at least 50 CAMs in mammals.
N-CAMs (neuronal cell adhesion molecules): N-CAMs were first discovered because of their roles in the development of retinal neurons. Each N-CAM binds to another N-CAM, which is called homophilic binding.
The cadherins (their adhesion properties are Ca2+-dependent)
CADHERINS: There are many cadherins, the major type found in brain, [N-cadherin], is present on most neurons and is expressed very early in development. Adhesion between individual cadherins is by homophilic binding and is Ca2+-dependent. Most neurons express both N-CAMs and N-cadherin.
The integrins; they mediate interactions between the cell-surface and the extracellular matrix (ECM)
INTEGRINS: Integrins are transmembrane proteins involved in adhesion between cell-surfaces and components of the ECM; the adhesive interactions between integrins and other macromolecules is by heterophilic binding. The expression of different combinations of integrins on different cells determines which ECM molecules they bind.
Components of the ECM that bind integrins include:
Fibronectin (secreted by fibroblasts and found in the peripheral nervous system [PNS])
Laminin (comprises the basement membrane of non-neuronal cells and the basal lamina of cells in the PNS; there appears to be a family of laminins)
Local guidance cues are provided by cell surface proteins that act on the growing axon as it follows its path towards its eventual target.
The homophilic interaction of the CAMs has suggested a role in mediating axon fasciculation and adhesion of axons to cells and/or axon pathways.
The ventral midline of the nervous systems acts as an important intermediate target for axons. Growth cones are able to sense specific cues at the midline that influence their decision to cross or not to cross. In addition to being a source of attractants and repellents, the ventral midline is also able to alter an axon's ability to respond to these cues. For example, after crossing the floor plate, axons that were responsive to the chemoattractant Netrin 1 prior to crossing are, after crossing, no longer able to respond to this cue.
The growth of single sensory axons in an in vitro system led to the identification of an activity in extracts of embryonic spinal cord and of postnatal and adult brain, that promotes the elongation and formation of extensive branches by these axons. Biochemical purification of the activity led to the identification of an amino-terminal fragment of Slit2 as the main active component. Thus, Slit proteins may function as positive regulators of axon collateral formation during the establishment or remodeling of neural circuits. The receptor for slit is present on axonal growth cones and has been identified as the Roundabout (Robo) protein.
Receptor tyrosine kinases, extracellular matrix molecules, and netrins, semaphorins and their receptors are also involved in axon guidance. The functions of each are explained below.
Receptor tyrosine kinases can function to modulate or guide axon growth. In general these receptors are found on developing axons and allow the axon to respond to various growth factors in the local environment. For example, one type of fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFr, a tyrosine kinase) is necessary for FGF or N-CAM-induced neurite outgrowth. The neurotrophins, NGF, BDNF, NT-3, and NT-4/5, are usually thought of as survival factors for neurons, although these growth factors can also promote axon outgrowth, allow axons to invade their target regions, and promote axon terminal arborization.
Extracellular matrix (ECM) molecules can act to promote or inhibit neurite outgrowth. Laminin, tenascin, collagen, fibronectin, and a number of proteoglycans have been suggested to modulate axonal outgrowth. For example, laminin can promote, while tenascin can inhibit neurite extension. Receptors for ECM molecules include the integrins as well as Ig family members.
The laminin family and its receptors are one of the best studied examples of ECM molecules with regard to neuronal development. There are at least ten different isoforms of laminins that have growth promoting or inhibiting effects on different cell types. The axonal receptors for laminins are integrins. Integrins are heterodimers whose subunit composition determines binding specificity with respect to the laminins. The integrins link ECM signals to the cytoskeleton and various signal transduction pathways. The role of laminins and other ECM molecules in neuronal development is to affect axonal guidance.
The netrins are a family of secreted proteins related to laminins in sequence They are both diffusable and cell associated. The netrins were identified using two approaches. A genetic assay in nematode uncovered a mutant gene that resulted in defects in cell migration and axon guidance and an in vitro assay using chick floor plate cell extracts identified a factor that results in outgrowth and guidance of spinal cord axons. Netrins are well conserved from nematode to human and are encoded by only one or two genes in most species. Netrin binds to two types of axonal receptors (DCC/UNC-40 and UNC-5) that determine whether the actions of netrin are attractive or repulsive.
The semaphorins are a large family of cell surface or secreted proteins that mediate growth cone collapse, axonal steering, axonal branching, and axon terminal arborization. At least ten semaphorins are found in humans and they appear to function predominantly as inhibitory (repulsive) factors for axonal guidance. Neuropilins serve as receptors for secreted semaphorins, whereas members of the plexin family are receptors for other semaphorins. Secreted semaphorins do not bind directly to plexins, but plexins can associate with neuropilins. Thus, plexins are receptors for multiple classes of semaphorins, either alone or in combination with neuropilins, and trigger a signal transduction pathway controlling axon guidance.
The growth of developing axons depends on:
Physical guidance cues such as guidepost cells and pioneer axons.
Local and long-range molecules involved in attraction and repulsion of developing axons (the presence of which substantiates the chemoaffinity hypothesis of Sperry).
The presence of receptors on developing axons that allow for modulation of growth by environmental factors.
The establishment of synaptic connections and their maintenance depends the interactions of axons and their targets. These interactions are responsible for synapse stabilization and neuron survival. Synaptic transmission depends on the association of the pre- and post-synaptic elements. The pre- and postsynaptic regions of cells are highly specialized architecturally, which allows for efficient information transfer. The architecture of the synapse is formed during development and can change in an activity-dependent manner.
The presynaptic nerve terminal matures from the growth cone and becomes highly specialized to subserve functions necessary for chemical neurotransmission. The presynaptic nerve terminal contains mitochondria and endosomes, although the most striking aspect of this structure is the presence of numerous neurotransmitter-containing synaptic vesicles. Relatively little is known about the molecular mechanisms that underlie differentiation of the presynaptic nerve terminal. It is known that the switch between constitutive vesicle cycling that takes place in the growth cone, and regulated secretion from the mature presynaptic terminal represents a dramatic alteration in function.
In order for efficient reception of the neurotransmitter signal, the receptors on the postsynaptic cell are clustered at sites opposite the presynaptic active zone. The clustering of postsynaptic receptors is an adaptive behavior that has been studied in detail using the neuromuscular junction as a model system. The nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (AChR) is a ligand-gated ion channel that responds to a signal provided by the neurotransmitter acetylcholine, the transmitter used at the neuromuscular junction. (Additional information about acetylcholine is found in Chapter 11.) AChRs are found at a density of 10,000-20,000/um2 in the postsynaptic membrane while there are about 10/um2 at extrasynaptic sites. The extraordinary concentration of AChRs at the synapse suggests that the muscle has the capacity to anchor these receptors, while their presence in direct opposition to the presynaptic active zone suggests that the nerve plays a role in organizing the postsynaptic membrane.
The cleft separating pre- and postsynaptic membranes contains the basal lamina which coats the entire muscle fiber and is composed of collagens, proteoglycans, and other extracellular matrix molecules including laminin as well as nerve-derived molecules such as agrin (see Chapter 9 part 6). The basal lamina plays a critical role in the assembly of the postsynaptic membrane.
Much of our knowledge about synapse formation comes from studies on nerve-muscle regeneration. Basal lamina patches that are allowed to contact damaged muscle tissue induce the regenerating myotubes to form postsynaptic specializations. These studies suggested that there is an AChR clustering agent in the basal lamina. Agrin was purified from basal lamina extracts as a molecule that is capable of inducing formation of clusters of AChRs on myotubes. Further study showed that agrin is present in motor neurons, is transported down motor neuron axons and is retained in the synaptic basal lamina. Antibodies against agrin inhibit AChR clustering. Agrin deficient mice have disorganized neuromuscular junctions and have decreased number, size, and density of AChRs at the neuromuscular junction.  Thus, agrin appears to be a nerve-derived factor that organizes postsynaptic differentiation. Agrin may bind to several candidate receptors including alpha-dystroglycan, heparan sulfate proteoglycans, and a muscle-specific tyrosine kinase (MUSK) to produce its effects.
The muscle plasma membrane has AChRs on its surface, which are uniformly distributed before the motor nerve growth cone arrives. Shortly after innervation, the distribution of extrajunctional receptors decreases and the density of receptors at the newly forming neuromuscular synapse increases dramatically. This effect occurs precisely at the site where the growth cone releases ACh. These changes occur by the redistribution of existing receptors and the synthesis and insertion of new receptors at synapses.
The axon of the motor neuron induces ACh receptors to cluster on muscle fibers. As the axon approaches the muscle fiber most of the AChRs are distributed diffusely on its surface. When the axon begins to establish synaptic transmission, the distribution of AChRs begins to change. AChRs begin to cluster at the newly formed synaptic contact, while extrasynaptic receptors decrease dramatically.
What factors are responsible for the changes in AChR density during nerve-muscle formation? It is NOT the release of ACh from nerve terminals. Increased AChR density during neuromuscular junction formation results from release of molecules from motor nerve terminals, including AChR inducing activity (ARIA), a molecule that promotes an increase in total AChR and receptor clusters, and Agrin, a protein that induces clustering of pre-existing AChRs and other components of the NMJ.
During nerve-muscle synapse formation, these biological properties of AChRs change after innervation:
The turnover rate of receptors decreases.
Their conductance properties increase.
Receptor open time decreases.
The subunit composition of individual receptors at the NMJ changes during development.
At the neuromuscular junction, synapses compete for innervation of a muscle fiber. Although this competition results in a reduction in the number of synaptic inputs to a muscle, the complexity of each synaptic input increases and the strength of each synapse increases.
Synapse elimination at the neuromuscular junction involves a loss of AChRs and a withdrawal of the presynaptic terminal. Activity-dependent competition between motor axons favors more active inputs. Direct competition between nerve fibers favors the axon that is able to compete for trophic factors supplied by the target cell. Indirect competition allows the muscle to select the favored axon. An additional strategy for synapse elimination may be that the elimination is provoked by a retrograde messenger. Additional information about retrograde signaling are found in Chapter 14, part 3.
In the adult, almost all muscle fibers are innervated by a single motor neuron. However, early in development many postsynaptic targets are innervated by multiple nerve terminals (this is true for skeletal muscles). During synapse maturation many nerve terminals disappear. Synapse elimination is thought to occur by the withdrawal of presynaptic terminals. Although the number of distinct synaptic inputs to a given target decreases during this process, the complexity of individual remaining terminals actually increases (individual synapses become larger and have more complex structures). The net result of this process is an increase in the overall strength of individual synapses. This process of synapse elimination and rearrangement plays an important role in sculpting the circuitry of the nervous system and the fine tuning of individual synaptic contacts.
The development of connectivity in the central nervous system requires the initiation of synaptic contacts and the maintenance of the correct number of synapses. It is not clear why, but it seems that more synapses are created than are eventually required for proper neuronal function. Under these circumstances, some synapses are eliminated. The process of synapse elimination allows for a "use dependent" form of Darwinism; those synapses that are necessary are retained while those that are simply redundant are removed. The neuromuscular junction and the visual system have been used as models to provide insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying synapse elimination.
In most developing tissues, substantial cell death occurs during development. One type of cell death occurs in an activity-dependent manner and is related to synapse elimination (see above). Cell death has been suggested to be the default pathway for all cells, and cells that escape do so by receiving appropriate trophic support. With the growing realization that pathological cell death shares features in common with cell death that occurs during development, a better understanding of developmental cell death may reveal potential therapeutic strategies for the treatment of neurodegenerative disorders and trauma.
The formation of synaptic connections between a presynaptic neuron and its target is often critical to the survival of the presynaptic neuron. In many cases if a synapse is not formed, or if an incorrect synapse is made, then the presynaptic neuron will eventually die. The survival of neurons is often dependent on trophic factors that are produced by the target tissue. Trophic factors are essential for neuron survival; their function is to promote cell growth. (Note: trophic factors should not be confused with chemotropic factors that attract cells.)
Early studies on cultured sensory and sympathetic neurons suggested that they require a target-derived factor (nerve growth factor, NGF) for their survival. Competition for NGF occurs when multiple axons innervate a single target that has limited amounts of NGF. Innervating axons possess NGF receptors that bind, internalize, and retrogradely transport NGF. The biochemical cascade produced by NGF internalization and transport results in signals that prevent cell death.
One of the first physiological roles that was discovered for NGF was its importance in the survival of sensory and sympathetic neurons. If anti-NGF antibodies are injected into newborn animals to "neutralize" the actions of NGF the survival of sympathetic neurons is greatly reduced.
For developing neurons in the superior cervical ganglion the natural source of NGF can be blocked by the daily injections of anti-NGF antibodies into newborn animals. This treatment results in the premature death of these neurons. In contrast, if newborn animals are injected with NGF itself, the added NGF actually prevents the naturally occurring death of certain types of neurons.
The cellular actions of growth factors (NGF, BDNF, NT-3, NT-4) are mediated by specific cell surface receptors. The high affinity NGF receptor is a tyrosine kinase that confers the biological activity of NGF to cells by acting through downstream signaling processes that eventually involve alterations in gene transcription. This kinase is known as trkA. Other growth factors bind to different receptor tyrosine kinases. For example, TrkB is specifically activated by low concentrations of BDNF and NT-4/5, and can be activated by high concentrations of NT-3.TrkC is related to trkA, but is most effectively activated by NT-3; all trks are transmembrane proteins that contain an extracellular ligand binding domain and an intracellular (cytosolic) tyrosine kinase domain. When trks are activated by the appropriate ligand (e.g., NGF or BDNF) they initiate a series of intracellular signaling cascades.
NGF is related to other trophic factors such as BDNF, NT-3, NT-4, and CNTF. These factors are structurally related to NGF and are survival factors for neurons that do not respond to NGF. Trophic signals produced by some of these molecules are not all target-derived like NGF. Neurons may receive trophic signals from molecules in the extracellular matrix, from glia, and in an autocrine or paracrine manner. Withdrawal of these factors results in cell death for neuronal populations that are dependent on these factors.
Disruption of different neurotrophin genes in mice has allowed analysis of the role of these factors in sensory-motor pathways. The dorsal root ganglia (DRG) of wild-type mice possess small (red), medium (green), and large (blue) cells. The small cells that carry pain and temperature information are lost when NGF or its high affinity receptor, trkA, are missing. Large cells that innervate muscle spindles are lost when NT-3 or TrkC are missing. These data underline the importance of different neurotrophins in supporting the development of distinct cell populations.
This section focuses on the serious, and often irreversible, damage to central and peripheral nervous systems caused by injury to neurons. In almost every case, neurons have withdrawn from the mitotic cycle and therefore can no longer divide to produce new neurons to replace damaged cells. Therefore, neuron loss due to injury has profound results, since the loss of affected pathways will permanently change the functional circuitry of the nervous system. In those cases where neurons do regenerate following injury, the mechanisms that contribute to regeneration appear to be very similar to the events that promote axon growth and synapse formation during development. Several general rules govern neuronal responses to injury:
Regeneration in mammals is much poorer than lower vertebrates.
Regeneration in the CNS is much less likely than in the PNS.
Trophic factors play important roles in neuronal regeneration.
Neurons in the peripheral nervous system can regenerate their axons. This contrasts with the general inability of damaged neurons in the CNS to regenerate. The regeneration of peripheral neurons is due in large part to the role of trophic factors which provide an important function in preventing their degeneration after axotomy. Some of the same molecules required for immature neurons to develop and survive are also involved in the survival of adult neurons after injury. For example, if the axons of an adult sympathetic neuron are cut, the axon terminals of afferent neurons withdraw their axon terminals. However, if exogenous NGF is added, then regeneration and reinnervation occurs. If anti-NGF antibodies are added to neutralize NGF, then regeneration is blocked. Blocking the retrograde transport of NGF from the target cell to the damaged sympathetic neuron's cell body also inhibits regeneration. Thus, NGF is required for the regeneration and maintenance of peripheral synaptic connections in the adult PNS.
Schwann cells also contribute to the regeneration of peripheral axons. During damage and regeneration of axons, macrophages are activated and invade damaged areas. They secrete mitogenic factors that stimulate Schwann cell proliferation. Glial cell proliferation results in the increased secretion of extracellular matrix molecules and helps to promote adhesion between the regenerating axons and the remaining supporting cells. The synthesis and secretion of NGF is also stimulated under these conditions and provides important short-term conditions for regeneration. Thus, NGF plays another role in regeneration because it is produced by components of the peripheral nervous system that are not themselves postsynaptic targets.
Damage to CNS neurons is often irreversible. Why are CNS neurons different than peripheral neurons in this regard? In the adult brain important ECM molecules like laminin and fibronectin are no longer expressed and thus important adhesion molecules are absent from the regenerating environment. In addition, oligodendroglia (the myelinating cells of the CNS) express growth inhibitory molecules in the adult that block axon regrowth.
As discussed above, the environment and properties of peripheral nerves are much more supportive of the regeneration process. For example, Schwann Cells secrete NGF, ECM and other adhesive molecules that are critical for neuronal survival and axon regeneration. In addition, Schwann cells do not express molecules that inhibit axon growth like oligodendroglia in the CNS. The use of peripheral nerve grafts to promote regeneration of damaged nerves in the CNS is one possible way to overcome the limited regeneration potential of CNS neurons.
For example, following transection of the optic nerve, if a section of peripheral nerve is attached to the cut end of the optic nerve and its other end is inserted into superior colliculus, then regeneration of the optic nerve can occur. Evidence supporting the functional regeneration of the cut optic nerves includes:
Retinal ganglion axons regenerated and reinnervated the superior colliculus.
New synapses are formed which last for at least one year.
These new synapses are functional; if retinal neurons are activated by light, then postsynaptic neurons in the colliculus respond (they also respond to direct electrical stimulation of retinal neurons).
Experimental subjects with PNS nerve grafts have partially restored light avoidance behavior.
Administration of growth factors during nerve grafts can enhance regeneration.
NGF also appears to play an important role in the survival of cholinergic neurons of the basal forebrain where neurons degenerate in Alzheimer's disease.
Following damage to an axon by cutting, a sequence of changes occurs during degeneration. Under certain conditions, both retrograde and anterograde transneuronal degeneration can occur.
Cutting an axon divides it into proximal and distal segments
Immediately after injury, axons begin to seal off, however, Ca2+ enters damaged axonal elements and activates Ca2+-dependent proteases
Rapid failure of synaptic transmission occurs within hours (depending on where the axon is cut relative to the distal-proximal axis; metabolic and protein synthetic machinery remains in the cell body)
Within days presynaptic terminals begin to degenerate and in about 1 week invading glia disrupt and phagocytose synaptic contacts
The distal segment degenerates slowly and may take up to 1 month; the loss of distal segments is called Wallerian degeneration
There are also major changes that occur in the neuronal cell body during degeneration; a few days after axotomy, the process of chromatolysis starts in the soma:
RER (rough endoplasmic reticulum) breaks down and moves to periphery of the cell body (or soma).
There is an increase in free polyribosomes, mRNA transcription and protein synthesis (the injured neuron's response to injury is to increase its metabolic rebuilding).
A damaged neuron's success in regeneration is linked to its ability to find an appropriate target to reinnervate; failure to contact a target usually results in cell death.
If the injured neuron survives damage (and this often depends on the appropriate trophic factors being present), the process of reinnervation begins:
The axon's proximal segment forms sprouts and the process of regrowth begins.
Axonal sprouts migrate into the conduit formed by the residual endoneural sheath that surrounded the previous axon.
Axon sprouts migrate to find a target; if a suitable target is found, the neuron survives; if not, the neuron dies/
Cellular damage is not restricted to injured neurons; degeneration is often transneuronal or transsynaptic. In the visual pathway, damage of retinal ganglion neurons often results in degeneration of downstream target neurons in the lateral geniculate and even to neurons in the visual cortex. This is called transsynaptic anterograde degeneration. This process can also happen in the reverse direction (i.e., damage to visual cortex neurons can result in degeneration of geniculate and then retinal neurons), and is called transsynaptic retrograde degeneration.
Traumatic injury to neurons is often irreversible. However, in those instances in which neurons do regenerate following injury, the mechanisms that contribute to regeneration are similar to those events that contribute to axonal growth and synapse formation during development.
During normal development synapse formation is a gradual process that results in one muscle fiber becoming innervated by one motor axon. Following axotomy, the postsynaptic structures called synaptic gutters remain on the surface of the muscle fiber.
During reinnervation, the nerve forms new synaptic contacts at the old synaptic gutters: the one-to-one relationship between nerve and muscle fiber is maintained.
A large number of crippling neurological conditions result from the loss of certain cell populations from the nervous system through disease or injury, and these cells are not intrinsically replaced. Replacement of depleted cell populations by transplantation may be of functional benefit in many such diseases. A diverse range of cell populations is vulnerable, and the loss of specific populations results in circumscribed deficits in different conditions. This diversity presents a considerable challenge if cell replacement therapy is to become widely applicable in the clinical domain, because each condition has specific requirements for the phenotype, developmental stage, and number of cells required.
New discoveries have made inroads in the use of immortalized cell lines to replace or supplement the decreased or lost functions of damaged nervous system tissues. There have also been limited advances in the area of transplantation using fetal tissues (however, this approach is ethically controversial). Areas in which these new approaches have been tried include:
the synthesis and secretion of catecholamines in patients with Parkinson's disease
the synthesis and secretion of growth/trophic factors (e.g., NGF) in patients with Alzheimer's disease
the synthesis and secretion of ECM and adhesion molecules to promote regeneration in patients with damaged CNS or PNS tissues
These approaches are technically complicated at both cellular and molecular levels. One of the problems encountered is that although tissue or cell transplants seem to have positive short-term benefits, their long-term effects have been limited.
An ideal cell for universal application in cell replacement therapy would possess several key properties: it would be highly proliferative, allowing the ex vivo production of large numbers of cells from minimal donor material; it would also remain immature and phenotypically plastic such that it could differentiate into appropriate neural and glial cell types on, or prior to, transplantation. Critically, both proliferation and differentiation would be controllable. Neural stem cells exist not only in the developing mammalian nervous system but also in the adult nervous system of all mammalian organisms, including humans. Neural stem cells can also be derived from more primitive embryonic stem cells. The cells can be expanded, established in continuous cell lines and differentiated into the three classical neuronal phenotypes (neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes). The mechanisms that regulate endogenous stem cells are poorly understood. Potential uses of stem cells in repair include transplantation to repair missing cells and the activation of endogenous cells to provide "self-repair. " Before the full potential of neural stem cells can be realized, we must understand what controls their proliferation, as well as the various pathways of differentiation available to their daughter cells.
Postsynaptic targets supply critical neurotrophic factors.
In addition to NGF, several neurotrophic factors have been identified (e.g., BDNF and neurotrophin 3).
Reactions of neurons to injury can vary dramatically; neurons usually survive if functional connections are formed during the regeneration process.
Although regeneration is possible in the PNS, regeneration in the CNS is poor or nonexistent.
Future biomedical research will continue to actively pursue approaches to restore the function of damaged neuronal tissues. The future of understanding important molecules and mechanisms that underlie regeneration lies in basic neurobiological research. Areas to receive attention include:
The identification of new cell-surface and extracellular matrix molecules that promote axon growth and regeneration.
The identification and production of new trophic factors that are essential for cell survival and growth.
The examination of potential use of embryonic stem cells to functionally replace lost neurons.
In addition, tissue transplantation and peripheral nerve grafts will continue to be studied since they represent one of the most viable approaches to CNS regeneration.
As you learned in previous chapters, neurotransmission occurs through the secretion of neurotransmitter from a nerve ending to influence the postsynaptic cell. In this chapter the biological mechanisms of vesicle mediated synaptic transmission will be presented.
Within the last twenty years it has become apparent that all intracellular membrane trafficking is based on the same fundamental mechanisms. The same operations involved in the synthesis and transport of vesicles at the ER and Golgi apparatus in the soma are employed in a modified fashion during neurosecretion. The major difference is that vesicle trafficking during neurosecretion is regulated by Ca2+ influx whereas vesicle trafficking during the synthesis and transport of vesicles is not. Unregulated trafficking is termed constitutive. In both cases, however, trafficking is made up of a series of steps involving budding of vesicles, their docking with other organelles, and fusion with the membranes of these organelles. These processes are believed to be present during vesicle biogenesis when the ER generates vesicles that fuse with the Golgi apparatus, when the endosomes are trafficked to the lysosomes, and when vesicle membrane is recaptured from the nerve ending plasma membrane. There is a budding from their membrane origin, a movement to the destination point, and finally the docking of the vesicles with the target organelle where it attaches to and fuses with the organelle membrane.
This section will cover the life of a neurotransmitter vesicle beginning with its synthesis in the cell soma, transport to the nerve ending, recycling at the nerve ending. Vesicle proteins are eventually returned to the cell soma for reuse in the synthesis of new vesicles.
The cycle of neurotransmitter vesicles begins in the ER where the proteins that make up the vesicles are synthesized. Vesicle biosynthesis continues as the proteins migrate through the smooth ER and the Golgi apparatus to eventually emerge to be transported to the nerve ending. The outer layer of the nuclear envelope is contiguous with the endoplasmic reticulum, which is in turn contiguous with the Golgi apparatus.
As shown in Figure 10,3, after the mRNA is transcribed from the DNA in the nucleus, it migrates through pores in the nuclear envelope called the perinuclear cisternae (label (A) in Figure 10.3). As the mRNA reaches the cytoplasm it encounters free ribosomes, labeled (B). This is the site of cytoplasmic protein synthesis. Here, triplet nucleotide combinations, called codons, translate the mRNA into protein through a mechanism where ribosomes read off the protein sequence encoded in the mRNA. As ribosomes move along the mRNA template amino acids are added and the protein synthesized. Because most mRNA molecules are longer than a ribosome, many ribosomes can read the codons of a single molecule of RNA.
Click "B" in the graphic at right for animation of cytoplasmic protein synthesis.
Proteins that are destined to be associated with membrane structures, such as neurotransmitter vesicles or the plasmalemma, are synthesized on ribosomes within the endoplasmic reticulum. Recall that the presence of ribosomes defines this part of the endoplasmic reticulum as rough endoplasmic reticulum.
In (C) of Figure 10,3, the polypeptide (protein) being synthesized has no signal peptide. Consequently, this protein will become a non-membrane bound (soluble) protein that resides within lumen of vesicles. While in the lumen, the protein undergoes further processing as it proceeds through the smooth ER, Golgi apparatus, and the secretory vesicle as mature secretory proteins are formed.
In (D) of Figure 10,3, a signal peptide is a part of the polypeptide being synthesized (this is signified in the figure by the fact that the peptide is anchored in the ribosomal membrane). Consequently, this protein will be an integral membrane protein. As the ribosome moves along the mRNA template, amino acids are added. The signal peptide inserts in the membrane of the endoplasmic reticulum and maintains the protein's association with membrane. This will ensure that the protein will associate with a vesicular structure, such as a neurotransmitter storage vesicle. Shows the protein synthesis from ribosomes in the rough ER to synthesize membrane bound protein.
Figures 10,4 illustrates the movement of the secretory vesicles through the rough and the smooth ER. The smooth ER extends from the RER and serves as a site for lipid biosynthesis for the production of endosomes, lysosomes and plasma membrane as well as for the neurotransmitter vesicles. New membrane protein that begins its synthesis in the RER continues in the SER where pieces of the SER bud off to form transport vesicles that shuttle to the Golgi apparatus with their contents.
As shown in Figure 10,5, in the Golgi apparatus the vesicles fuse to form the outermost of the Golgi apparatus cisternae stacks. Each cisterna migrates in a stepwise fashion through the Golgi apparatus toward the concave surface. During this migration, proteins become more concentrated and undergo various types of biochemical modification to produce mature functional proteins. These modifications include phosphorylation, glycosylation, proteolysis and addition of fatty acids, as well as others. The migration proceeds from the cis face close to the SER to the concave trans face. Upon reaching the concave face the cisternae round up into small vacuoles, then coalesce to form a larger condensing vacuole. The condensing vacuoles then give rise to a number of dense spherical transport vesicles. These vesicles bud off and are transported to the various destinations within the neuron where they become cell membrane, lysosomes, endosomes or neurotransmitter vesicles.
Vesicles formed in the cell soma are moved to the site at which they will be used in synaptic transmission. This step in the trafficking of the vesicle is mediated by a process termed fast anterograde axoplasmic transport. As depicted in Figure 10.6, transport is mediated through the interaction of the vesicle with the microtubule. Transport is an energy dependent process in which a so-called motor protein, kinesin, associates with vesicles and moves down the microtubule in a series of attachment-detachment steps. Evidence for the existence of axoplasmic transport comes from a variety of observations, including the movement of radioactive proteins synthesized in the cell soma down the axon to the nerve endings. The speed of transport is 0.5-1.5 cm per hour. Ca2+ is also required for transport. The vinca alkaloid drugs colchicine and vinblastine prevent axoplasmic transport through their disruption of microtubules.
As discussed in Chapter 5, neurotransmitter is secreted at the nerve ending through the Ca2+-dependent fusion of neurotransmitter storage vesicle with the plasma membrane with the neurotransmitter being secreted (released) into the synaptic cleft to influence the postsynaptic cell. This process is termed exocytosis. An important concept to emerge is that the same mechanisms that occur in vesicle fusion with membranes in the Golgi during vesicle biosynthesis are also employed at the nerve ending for neurotransmitter release. This is true for vesicle synthesis. Even very simple cells like yeast. This conservation of mechanisms has permitted the use of simple systems to help understand the molecular mechanisms of neurotransmitter release.
As shown in Figure 10,7, the first event that must occur (with the exception of neuropeptide neurotransmitters) is the filling of vesicles with neurotransmitter through specific neurotransmitter uptake (NT Uptake). This uptake will be covered in subsequent chapters that discuss each of the specific neurotransmitters.
The vesicles remain in reserve until needed for secretion. When needed for secretion, a translocation occurs, which is also referred to as mobilization. The vesicles move to a region of plasma membrane called the active zone. The active zone is the release site and is characterized by the appearance of dense material adjacent to the plasma membrane. The influx of Ca2+ is believed to increase translocation by increasing the Ca2+ dependent phosphorylation of a vesicle binding protein termed synapsin. The theory is that Ca2+ dependent phosphorylation of synapsin frees the vesicles from binding to actin microfilaments. The vesicles then bind to the active zone of the plasma membrane, where they are in position to undergo release of their neurotransmitter.
The association of the vesicle with the plasma membrane is termed docking and serves to prime the vesicle for secretion. The docking is believed to occur through the binding of proteins in the vesicle membrane to proteins in the plasma membrane. Several of these proteins have been discovered because they are targets for clostridia bacterial toxins that block synaptic transanimation. Several of these toxins and the proteins they detect are shown in Table I. The toxins are so toxic that a single molecule can poison a whole nerve terminal. One of the synaptic vesicle proteins is VAMP, and two of the synaptic plasmal membrane proteins are syntaxin and SNAP-25.
A third plasma membrane protein, n-sec-1, is important because its loose association with the plasma membrane prevents the binding of the neurotransmitter vesicle proteins until n-sec-1 is displaced (the mechanism of n-sec-1 displacement is currently not understood). This and subsequent steps in the secretory process are shown in Figure 10.8. The vesicle and plasma membrane proteins are hypothesized to complex with one another upon the displacement of n-sec-1 to form a "trimeric complex" (SNAP-25, syntaxin and VAMP). This three-member complex has been isolated, intact, from the nerve endings of animals. This association of the proteins initiates fusion. Vesicles at this stage are primed for release.
The final stage of release, also shown in Figure 10.8, is the fission of the membrane at the point of contact between the vesicle and the plasma membrane. Exocytosis of neurotransmitter into the synaptic cleft occurs when this fission takes place. This step is Ca2+ stimulated, but the mechanism of the Ca2+ trigger is unknown. One hypothesis is that a vesicle protein called synaptotagmin binds Ca2+ to initiate fission. Support for synaptotagmin, as the Ca2+ sensor, is that it possesses two binding sites for Ca2+. Additional evidence comes from studies of mice in which synaptotagmin has been knocked out. In these mice fast Ca2+-triggered synaptic vesicle exocytosis is severely limited. Many aspects of the fusion-fission mechanism remain to be understood, including: what causes the dissociation of n-sec-1 from the complex, how Ca2+ functions in the release process and how all the proteins that are involved in release become reassociated with the proper membrane following release as the vesicle membrane is recycled.
Although the source of vesicles for neurotransmitter secretion comes from biosynthesis in the Golgi apparatus at the cell body, evidence indicates that local re-synthesis of synaptic vesicle is an important aspect of neurotransmitter secretion. Figures 10.9 and 10.10 provides two schematic summaries of how vesicles are locally reused. Both utilize the recapture of vesicle membrane from the nerve ending. In one, vesicles bud off the plasma membrane through the formation of pits that migrate directly to become a neurotransmitter vesicle as soon as it can be refilled with neurotransmitter through the neurotransmitter uptake process. This is shown in Figure 10.9. This mechanism is referred to as the "kiss and run" hypothesis. The second mechanism involves the formation of clathrin coated pits to recapture vesicle membrane, and the vesicles cycle through the endosomal compartment in the nerve ending before becoming functional synaptic vesicles. The vesicles then bud off the endosome to form the neurotransmitter vesicle. This is shown in Figure 10.10. It is believed that both mechanisms can exist in the same nerve ending or only one of the two can be present. Both are important in that they recover vesicle protein to permit a plentiful supply for synaptic transmission. This mechanism also prevents the enlargement of the nerve ending that would occur if vesicle membrane were not recaptured. No matter which mechanism is involved, the supply and resupply of vesicles can only keep pace with a high rate of synaptic transmission for a few minutes.
Eventually the proteins utilized for synaptic transmission in the nerve ending are targeted and returned to the cell body of the neuron to be recycled to make new protein and vesicles. The proteins are returned to the soma through a retrograde axoplasmic transport that is analogous to anterograde transport but uses a different motor protein, dynein. Transport is mediated by the interaction of dynein with microtubules and proceeds at a rate somewhat slower than that of fast anterograde transport (0.2-1 cm per day). In addition to returning proteins to the soma, retrograde transport serves as a means of communication between the nerve endings and the cell soma. This is a mechanism to transport signaling molecules to regulate the development and maintenance of axonal contacts with postsynaptic cells.
Figure 10,12 shows a summary of retrograde and anterograde axoplasmic transport. It shows the motor proteins, kinesin and dynein, mediating the movement of vesicles and mitochondria anterogradely and vesicles retrogradely along microtubules. The animation shows the motor proteins as a part of the organelle that is transported. The other possible relationship between the motor protein and microtubules is that the motor proteins are a part of the microtubule and pass the vesicles along the microtubule.
Acetylcholine, the first neurotransmitter discovered, was originally described as "vagus stuff" by Otto Loewi because of its ability to mimic the electrical stimulation of the vagus nerve. It is now known to be a neurotransmitter at all autonomic ganglia, at many autonomically innervated organs, at the neuromuscular junction, and at many synapses in the CNS.
In this chapter we will discuss the acetylcholine’s anatomy, cell biology, physiological effects, role in behavior, and clinical applications.
In the autonomic nervous system, acetylcholine (ACh) is the neurotransmitter in the preganglionic sympathetic and parasympathetic neurons. These are shown in Figure 11.2 as the red ACh in the ganglion. ACh is also the neurotransmitter at the adrenal medulla and serves as the neurotransmitter at all the parasympathetic innervated organs. ACh is also the neurotransmitter at the sweat glands, and at the piloerector muscle of the sympathetic ANS (Labeled in blue in Figure 11.2).
In the peripheral nervous system, ACh is the neurotransmitter at the neuromuscular junction between the motor nerve and skeletal muscle.
In the central nervous system, ACh is found primarily in interneurons, shown in Figure 11.3 as orange and green cell clusters. A few important long-axon cholinergic pathways have also been identified. Noteworthy is the cholinergic projection from the nucleus basalis of Meynert (in the basal forebrain) to the forebrain neocortex and associated limbic structures, represented by the black pathway in Figure 11.3. Degeneration of this pathway is one of the pathologies associated with Alzheimer's disease. There is also a projection from the medial septal and diagonal band region to limbic structures (blue). Most subcortical areas are innervated by neurons from the ponto-mesencephalic region (purple in Figure 11.3).
Figure 11.4 is a summary of the biological mechanisms involved in the synthesis, storage secretion, receptor interaction and termination of acetylcholine. Click on the region of the cell describing these processes to learn more about each one.
Choline acetyltransferase (CAT): As shown in Figure 11.5, ACh is synthesized by a single step reaction catalyzed by the biosynthetic enzyme choline acetyltransferase. As is the case for all nerve terminal proteins, CAT is produced in the cholinergic cell body and transported down the axon to the nerve endings. Both CAT and ACh may be found throughout the neuron, but their highest concentration is in axon terminals. The presence of CAT is the "marker" that a neuron is cholinergic, only cholinergic neurons contain CAT.
The rate-limiting steps in ACh synthesis are the availability of choline and acetyl-CoA. During increased neuronal activity the availability of acetyl-CoA from the mitochondria is upregulated as is the uptake of choline into the nerve ending from the synaptic cleft. Ca2+ appears to be involved in both of these regulatory mechanisms. As will be described later, the inactivation of ACh is converted by metabolism to choline and acetic acid. Consequently much of the choline used for ACh synthesis comes from the recycling of choline from metabolized ACh. Another source is the breakdown of the phospholipid, phosphatidylcholine. One of the strategies to increase ACh neurotransmission is the administration of choline in the diet. However, this has not been effective, probably because the administration of choline does not increase the availability of choline in the CNS.
The majority of the ACh in nerve endings is contained in clear (as viewed in the electron microscope) 100 um vesicles. A small amount is also free in the cytosol. Vesicle-bound ACh is not accessible to degradation by acetylcholinesterase (see below).
The uptake of ACh into storage vesicle occurs through an energy-dependent pump that acidifies the vesicle. The acidified vesicle then uses a vesicular ACh transporter (VAChT) to exchange protons for ACh molecules. No useful pharmacological agents are available to modify cholinergic function through interaction with the storage of ACh.
Interestingly, the gene for VAChT is contained on the first intron of the choline acetyltransferase gene. This proximity implies the two important cholinergic proteins are probably regulated coordinately.
The release of ACh occurs through Ca2+ stimulated docking, fusion, and fission of the vesicle with the nerve terminal membrane, as discussed previously.
You will recall that the miniature endplate potentials and the quantal release in response to action potentials at the neuromuscular junction are due to the release of packets of ACh from individual storage vesicles (Chapter 5). Many toxins are known that interfere with these processes and are effective in preventing ACh secretion. The examples in Figure 11,6 shows botulinum toxin inhibition and black widow spider venom (BWSV) stimulation of ACh release.
As indicated in Table I, nicotinic receptors are located at the NMJ, autonomic ganglia and sparsely in the CNS.
The NMJ nicotinic ACh receptor consists of five polypeptide subunits: two α subunits and one each of β, δ, and γ (see Figure 11.8). A funnel-shaped internal ion channel is surrounded by the five subunits. The binding surface of the receptor appears to be primarily on the α subunits, near the outer surface of the molecule. The subunits contain recognition sites for agonists, reversible antagonists, and α-toxins (cobra α-toxin and α-bungarotoxin).
Whereas the NMJ nicotinic receptor is composed of four different species of subunit (2 α, β, γ, δ), the neuronal nicotinic receptor also is composed of only two subunit types (2 α and 3 β).
Muscarinic receptors, classified as G protein coupled receptors (GPCR), are located at parasympathetic autonomically innervated visceral organs, on the sweat glands and piloerector muscles and both post-synaptically and pre-synaptically in the CNS (see Table I). The muscarinic receptor is composed of a single polypeptide. Seven regions of the polypeptide are made up of 20-25 amino acids arranged in an α helix. Because each of these regions of the protein is markedly hydrophobic, they span the cell membrane seven times as depicted in Figure 11.9. The fifth internal loop and the carboxyl-terminal tail of the polypeptide receptor are believed to be the site of the interaction of the muscarinic receptor with G proteins (see right). The site of agonist binding is a circular pocket formed by the upper portions of the seven membrane-spanning regions.
ACh has excitatory actions at the neuromuscular junction, at autonomic ganglion, at certain glandular tissues and in the CNS. It has inhibitory actions at certain smooth muscles and at cardiac muscle.
The biochemical responses to stimulation of muscarinic receptor involve the receptor occupancy causing an altered conformation of an associated GTP-binding protein (G protein). G protein is made up of the three subunits α, β and γ. In response to the altered conformation of the muscarinic receptor, the a subunit of the G protein releases bound guanosine diphosphate (GDP) and simultaneously binds guanosine triphosphate (GTP). The binding of GTP "activates" the G protein, allowing dissociation of the α subunit from the trimeric complex and for it to interact with effector systems to mediate specific responses. An inherent GTPase catalytic activity of the G protein hydrolyzes the GTP back to GDP. This hydrolysis terminates the action of the G protein. The rate of hydrolysis of the GTP thus dictates the length of time the G protein remains activated.
Inhibition of Adenylate Cyclase: The muscarinic receptor, through interaction with an inhibitory GTP-binding protein, acts to inhibit adenylyl cyclase. Reduced cAMP production leads to reduced activation of cAMP-dependent protein kinase, reduced heart rate, and contraction strength.
Stimulation of Phospholipase C: The muscarinic receptor activates phosphoinositide-specific phospholipase C (PLCβ) through interaction with a GTP-binding protein. As shown in Figure 11.12a, the hydrolysis of phosphatidylinositol bisphosphate yields two second messengers; inositol trisphosphate (IP3) and diacylglycerol (DAG). The DAG activates protein kinase C (not shown). Cellular responses are influenced by PKC's phosphorylation of target proteins. As shown in Figure 11.12b, the IP3 diffuses to the smooth endoplasmic reticulum (ER) where it interacts with IP3 receptors to increase Ca2+ release from the intracellular storage site.
Activation of K+ Channels: In response to muscarinic cholinergic receptor stimulation, a GTP binding protein also can interact directly with K+ channels to increase K+ conductance, (Figure 11.13). This conductance increase increases the resting membrane potential in myocardial and other cell membranes leading to inhibition.
ACh binds only briefly to the pre- or postsynaptic receptors. Following dissociation from the receptor, the ACh is rapidly hydrolyzed by the enzyme acetylcholinesterase (AChE) as shown in Figure 11.14. This enzyme has a very high catalysis rate, one of the highest known in biology. AChE is synthesized in the neuronal cell body and distributed throughout the neuron by axoplasmic transport. AChE exists as alternatively spliced isoforms that vary in their subunit composition. The variation at the NMJ is a heteromeric protein composed of four subunits coupled to a collagen tail that anchors the multi-subunit enzyme to the cell membrane of the postsynaptic cell (Figure 11.14). This four-subunit form is held together by sulfhydryl bonds and the tail anchors the enzyme in the extracellular matrix at the NMJ. Other isoforms are homomeric and freely soluble in the cytoplasm of the presynaptic cell. AChE, unlike ChAT, is found in non-cholinergic neurons as well. In addition, other cholinesterases exist throughout the body, which are also able to metabolize acetylcholine. These are termed pseudocholinesterases.
Drugs that inhibit ACh breakdown are effective in altering cholinergic neurotransmission. In fact, the irreversible inhibition of AChE by isopropylfluoroesters are so toxic that they can be incompatible with life—inhibiting the muscles for respiration. This inhibition is produced because ACh molecules accumulate in the synaptic space, keep the receptors occupied, and cause paralysis. Two notable examples are insecticides and the gases used in biological warfare. The mechanism of action of these irreversible inhibitors of AChE is that they carbamylate the AChE, rendering it inactive. The carbamylation inactivates both the acetyl and choline binding domains. A recently developed antidote to these inhibitors cleaves the nerve gas so that it will dissociate from the AChE.
In contrast to the irreversible inhibitors, the reversible AChE inhibitors are effective in transiently increasing the ACh level and are effective in diseases and conditions where an increased ACh level is desired. The clinically important compound, eserine (physostigmine), reversibly inhibits AChE.
Nicotinic receptor activation causes the opening of the channel formed by the receptor. This increases the Na+ movement into the target cell, leading to depolarization and generation of the action potential. This rapidly developing change, termed a fast EPSP, is illustrated in Figures 4,3, and 6,2.
Muscarinic receptor activation of postsynaptic cells can be either excitatory or inhibitory and is always slow in onset and long in duration (Table I). Figure 11.16 and Figure 11,17 illustrate an excitatory and an inhibitory postsynaptic potential in the sympathetic ganglion. As described earlier, G protein activation underlies all actions of the muscarinic receptors, thus accounting for their slow onset.
The rapid nature of the synaptic transmission mediated by the nicotinic receptor is consistent with its role at the NMJ and in the ganglion of the ANS. Little is known about the role of the nicotinic receptor role in CNS behavior. Clearly, nicotine stimulation is related in some manner to reinforcement, as indicated by the prevalence of nicotine addiction among humans.
Muscarinic receptors, in contrast, are important mediators of behavior in the CNS. One example is their role in modulating motor control circuits in the basal ganglia. A second example is their participation in learning and memory. The latter is inferred from two types of observations: 1) muscarinic antagonists are amnesic agents, and 2) deterioration of the cholinergic innervation of the neocortex is associated with memory loss in Alzheimer’s disease.
Alzheimer's disease: A disease in which a marked deterioration occurs in the CNS, the hallmark of which is a progressive dementia. One of the characteristics of this disease is a marked decrease in ACh concentrations in the cerebral cortex and caudate nucleus.
Myasthenia gravis: A disease of the neuromuscular junction in which the receptors for ACh are destroyed through the actions of the patient's own antibodies.
Cholinergic Pharmacology: Numerous drugs are used clinically to interact with the cholinergic systems. Table II summarizes the major uses for cholinergic drugs.
Monoamines (also known as "biogenic amines") include three classes of neurotransmitters:
Catecholamines
Dopamine (DA), norepinephrine (NE, also called noradrenaline) and epinephrine (E, also called adrenaline) make up a class of neurotransmitters named on the basis of the hydroxylated phenol ring termed a catechol nucleus.
Indolamines
Serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine; 5-HT); is the principal member of this group of compounds. The name serotonin is derived from the fact that this substance was first isolated from the serum based on its ability to cause an increase in blood pressure. Melatonin, a second indolamine, is restricted to the pineal and is released into the blood stream in a manner that is regulated by the diurnal cycle. Melatonin will not be covered further in this chapter.
Histamine
Histamine has been recognized as a neurotransmitter in the CNS only within the past fifteen years.
Catecholamines are neurotransmitters in a sympathetic limb of the autonomic nervous system and in the CNS.
As shown in Figure 12,2, norepinephrine is a neurotransmitter in postganglionic sympathetic neurons where it acts on smooth muscle to cause either contraction or relaxation, depending on the types of receptors present (see below). DA is a neurotransmitter in autonomic ganglia where it modulates cholinergic transmission and in the kidney, where it produces renal vasodilation and inhibits Na+ and H2O reabsorption. Epinephrine and norepinephrine are neurohumoral agents released into the circulation by the adrenal medulla. The ratio of E to NE released is 4 to 1.
Generally, the cell bodies of catecholamine neurons are found in clusters in the brain stem or midbrain and project to other regions of the brain and spinal cord. NE, for example, projects to almost every area of the brain. In contrast, DA has a more restricted projection. Epinephrine, which will not be covered in this chapter, has the most restricted distribution.
The major site of DA cell bodies is the midbrain. These clusters of cells give rise to four DA systems shown in Figure 12,3:
Mesostriatal DA System - The mesostriatal DA system, referred to as the nigrostriatal pathway, is composed of two components, a dorsal mesostriatal pathway and a ventral mesostriatal pathway. These two pathways are important for movement control and reward mechanisms.
The dorsal mesostriatal pathway (blue) originates in the substantia nigra par compacta and ascends to innervate the corpus striatum (caudate, putamen, and globus pallidus), where it modulates the output of the corpus striatum. The destruction of the nigrostriatal cells in Parkinson's disease produces marked motor deficits.
The ventral mesostriatal pathway (red) also originates in the substantia nigra and ventral tegmental area, and innervates the nucleus accumbens, olfactory tubercles and medial caudate-putamen. The ventral nigrostriatal pathway plays an important role in positive incentive characteristics of rewarding behaviors and the psychostimulants, as will be discussed further in Chapter 12, Part 10.
Mesolimbocortical DA System - The Mesolimbocortical DA system (purple) originates in the midbrain and projects to limbic structures (septum, amygdala, hippocampus, olfactory nucleus, and limbic cortex). This DA system is believed to participate in schizophrenia. (See Chapter 12, Part 11) The current hypothesis is that an increase in DA function in the mesolimbic system and a decreased function in the mesocortical DA systems occur in schizophrenia.
Periventricular DA System - The periventricular DA system (orange in Fig. 12.3) coordinates motivated behavior. These DA cells originate in the periventricular region of hypothalamus and send short axons to several thalamic and hypothalamic nuclei. Collaterals also descend to the intermediolateral cell column of the spinal cord to synapse with sympathetic preganglionic neurons. This dual innervation of hypothalamic and sympathetic preganglionic neurons is believed to integrate the central and autonomic components of motivated behaviors, including behaviors such as sex, thirst and appetite.
Tuberohypophyseal DA System - The tuberohypophyseal DA system mediates the control of milk production during lactation. The DA cells (green) originate in the periventricular and arcuate nuclei of the hypothalamus and project to the median eminence of the hypothalamus where they release DA into the capillary plexus of the hypophyseal-portal system. DA travels to the anterior pituitary where it inhibits the release of prolactin, the hormone that stimulates milk production in lactating animals.
The major site of NE cell bodies is the medulla and pons. The NE cells consist of three main groups shown in Figure 12.4:
locus coeruleus complex (purple and red in Figure 12.4),
lateral tegmental system (blue in Figure 12.4), and
dorsal medullary system (green in Figure 12.4).
In all three cases the neurons project diffusely to broad regions of the brain where their nerve terminals lack conventional synaptic junctions. Release of transmitter from these cells is described as volume transmission, because NE, once released, is thought to diffuse and influence a number of adjacent cells.
Locus Coeruleus System - The locus coeruleus (LC-purple and red) is considered the most influential of the cell groups even though it consists of less than 2,000 cells on either side of the midline. This importance is because LC axons project rostrally via the dorsal noradrenergic bundle to innervate nearly the entire telencephalon and diencephalon, as well as dorsally to innervate the cerebellum and caudally to innervate the spinal cord. The nerve fibers are so highly ramified in the terminal fields such that each axon may branch as many as 100,000 times. This pattern of innervation enables the LC to synchronously modulate cellular activity across wide expanses of the cortex.
Lateral Tegmental System - The axons of the lateral tegmental system (blue) project caudally to the intermediolateral cell column of the spinal cord where they inhibit sympathetic preganglionic cells, and ventrally to the hypothalamus. The joint innervation of the hypothalamus and the intermediolateral column cells is believed to be the basis for NE integration of central and peripheral sympathetic autonomic function.
Dorsal Medullary System - As a complement to the lateral tegmental system, the dorsal medullary system (green) projects to the nucleus solitarius, as well as to the brain stem nuclei that control cranial parasympathetic function (glossopharyngeal, facial, and trigeminal- nuclei and the dorsal vagal nuclear complex). These NE systems are believed to provide control of the cranial parasympathetic system in a manner analogous to the lateral tegmental system's control of the sympathetic system.
Two clusters of epinephrine (E) cells are located in the medullary reticular formation. One cluster of cells in the ventrolateral medulla sends ascending projections to innervate the periaqueductal gray and several hypothalamic and olfactory nuclei. This cluster also sends a descending projection to innervate the sympathetic preganglionic cells of the intermediolateral column in a manner analogous to the NE lateral tegmental system. The second group of cells, located in the dorsomedial medulla near the floor of the fourth ventricle, project to several parasympathetic cranial nerve nuclei (similar to the dorsal medullary NE system, described above). These adrenergic cells are believed to coordinate eating and various visceral functions including the regulation of blood pressure.
Caudal System: The caudal cluster of 5-HT cells (B1-B4) is located close to the midline and project caudally to the spinal cord dorsal and ventral horns as well as the intermediolateral cell column. These pathways are believed to mediate the role of 5-HT in sensory, motor and autonomic functions, respectively.
Rostral System: The rostral midbrain cluster of cells (B5-B9), (raphe nuclei) are distributed throughout the midbrain. A cluster of cells located medially and another located dorsally provide over 80% of the 5-HT innervation of the forebrain. These cells project to the diencephalon, basal ganglia, limbic system, cortex, mesencephalic gray and inferior and superior colliculi. Some evidence supports the conclusion that the innervation of forebrain structures by serotonergic processes is complementary to that of NE. Another important aspect of 5-HT microanatomy is that two distinct patterns of innervation exist for these medial and dorsal systems. The dorsal system is similar in its anatomy to that of catecholamine neurons with thin diffusely branching axons lacking classic synaptic contacts (volume neurotransmission). The medial system, in contrast, appears to have classical synapses and is characterized by the presence of thick axons with large round nerve endings that make extensive synaptic contacts. These differences imply a marked difference in the physiological function of these two 5-HT systems.
Other Systems: In addition to the above two pathways, another 5-HT pathway projects partially from one of the rostral nuclei (B5) and partially from two caudal nuclei (B2 & B3, dark green in Figure 12.5) to innervate the cerebellar cortex and deep cerebellar nuclei. There is also a widespread 5-HT projection to structures within the brainstem, including the locus coeruleus, several cranial nuclei, inferior olivary nucleus, and nucleus solitarius.
Histamine cells (HA) are located exclusively in the basal posterior hypothalamus. These cells project extensively throughout the neural axis in a manner analogous to the NE and 5-HT systems. Although HA has not been investigated extensively, based on its diffuse innervation of the CNS and lack of classic synaptic contacts, it is likely that histamine has a broad behavioral and physiological function.
Histamine is also the major active substance released from mast cells. The presence of mast cells in the blood in the CNS has hindered the analysis of the role of histamine as a neurotransmitter.
The monoamines will be considered as a group in discussing the cell biology of their 1) synthesis, 2) storage and 3) release. Monoamine receptors and termination of action of each monoamine will be considered separately.
All monoamine (MA) neurotransmitters are synthesized from amino acids through a series of enzyme catalyzed reactions in which hydroxylation, decarboxylation and/or methylation convert the precursor amino acid into the active monoamine neurotransmitter.
Biosynthesis of all monoamines occurs primarily in the nerve terminal. As shown in Figure 12.7, the first step in the synthesis of catecholamines (DA and NE, as well as E, not shown) is the hydroxylation of the tyrosine to form DOPA. An analogous reaction, the hydroxylation of tryptophan to 5 hydroxytryptophane (5-HTP) is the first step in the biosynthesis of 5-HT. Both tyrosine hydroxylase and tryptophan hydroxylase are the rate-limiting steps in the biosynthetic pathway of the respective monoamines. Both enzymes are mixed function mono-oxygenases requiring molecular oxygen, iron and the cofactor, tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) for activity. BH4 is converted to BH2 during the hydroxylation and must be regenerated to BH4 in order for monoamine biosynthesis to continue. As shown in Figure 12.7, the enzyme pteridine reductase regenerates the active cofactor. Pteridine reductase is therefore also an essential enzyme in the synthesis of catecholamines. The next step in the biosynthesis of monoamines is the decarboxylation by aromatic amino acid decarboxylase (AADC) to form the corresponding monoamine (Dopamine and 5 hydroxytryptamine 5-HT, respectively). NE is then formed from dopamine through an additional reaction, the hydroxylation of the 2nd carbon of the DA side chain. This last hydroxylation step occurs within the monoamine storage vesicle (see Figure 12.9a) and is catalyzed by dopamine β hydroxylase.
Two additional cofactors are required for the synthesis of monoamines; vitamin B6 is necessary as a cofactor for AADC catalyzed decarboxylation. Vitamin C is required as a cofactor for DA conversion to NE in the storage vesicle (see Figure 12.9a).
Epinephrine is synthesized in adrenal medulla and CNS by methylation of NE on the amino-terminus (not shown). The enzyme that catalyzes this reaction is phenyl ethanolamine N methyl transferase (PNMT). This enzyme uses S-adenosyl methionine as the methyl donor to methylate norepinephrine to form epinephrine (the nor refers to the lack of the methyl group). PNMT's localization outside the storage vesicle requires that norepinephrine shuttle out of the vesicle to be converted to epinephrine and then back into the storage vesicle for storage and release.
As shown in Figure 12,8, in contrast to the catecholamines and 5-HT, the biosynthesis of histamine does not require hydroxylation. Histamine is the product of the decarboxylation of the amino acid, histidine, to form the monoamine, histamine, in a single step that is analogous to the decarboxylation of DOPA and 5-HTP. A different enzyme is used to decarboxylate histidine, histidine decarboxylase, as shown in Figure 12,8. This enzyme, like AADC, requires vitamin B6.
The concentration of catecholamines in nerve terminals remains relatively constant despite frequent fluctuations in neuronal activity. This homeostasis is achieved through the regulation of TH activity. TH is phosphorylated and activated by both calcium and cAMP dependent protein kinases. A longer-term regulation of CA synthesis also occurs. This regulation is mediated through altered transcription of TH mRNA and altered TH mRNA stability. Both mechanisms lead to increased levels of TH protein.
The level of serotonin is regulated principally by the amount of tryptophan available to serotonergic neurons. This has two important implications for the level of serotonin in the brain. First, because tryptophan is not synthesized in mammals, the level of tryptophan available for serotonin biosynthesis is dependent on diet. Thus, diets high in tryptophan can markedly elevate serotonin levels. Second, because tryptophan is transported across the blood brain barrier by a transport system which also transports certain other amino acids, diets high in these amino acids can reduce the level of serotonin in the brain by competing with tryptophan for transport into the CNS. As will be discussed later, altered serotonin level in the CNS can have marked consequences on behavior.
Thus far the mechanism for the regulation of histamine biosynthesis is unknown.
Monoamine neurotransmitters are stored in vesicles that appear dark at the EM level and are thus referred to as dense core vesicles. MA neurotransmitters are stored at a high concentration and are complexed with ATP and several proteins called chromogranins. One of these chromogranins is the enzyme, dopamine β hydroxylase (DβH), that converts DA to NE. As shown in Figure 12.9, MA neurotransmitters are taken into the vesicles by an exchange of H+ for the MA. In NE cells DA is taken up and converted to NE by DβH. As described above in the synthesis section, DβH hydroxylates the amino side chain. The uptake of MA neurotransmitters into storage vesicles is inhibited by the drug reserpine.
Neuronal activation elicits the release of MA neurotransmitters by a calcium-dependent exocytosis, as described in Lecture 10, under Secretory Mechanism. The vesicular contents are released from the nerve terminal into the extracellular space during secretion. Because there is no classic postsynaptic specialization associated with the majority of MA nerve endings, the released MA neurotransmitters diffuse to postsynaptic cells in the vicinity where they stimulate MA receptors (volume neurotransmission).
MA neurotransmitters also act on the presynaptic cell, as shown in Figure 12.10 to influence their cell biology in a feed back manner. The interaction with the presynaptic receptors (termed autoreceptors) can both stimulate MA biosynthesis and inhibit the further release of neurotransmitter. Both the pre- and postsynaptic MA receptors are G protein linked, seven trans-membrane receptors. Their structure is similar to the muscarinic receptors discussed in the Lecture 11, Cholinergic Neurotransmission.
The vast majority of the MA receptors are seven transmembrane, G-protein coupled receptors (GPCR) that mediate MA action through one of a few mechanisms. These are the same mechanisms employed by other GPCR, such as the muscarinic receptors (Chapter 12, Part 5) and GPC-glutamate receptors (Chapter 13, Part 3). These mechanisms are:
Stimulation or inhibition of adenylyl cyclase (Click here to see mechanism),
Stimulation of PLCβ or PLA (Click here to see mechanism), and
Direct action on ion channel (Click here to see mechanism).
As will be described below, one type of MA receptor, 5-HT3, is unusual in that it is NOT LINKED TO G PROTEIN LINKED RECEPTORS. Instead, 5-HT3 receptors are ligand gated ion channels, similar in structure and function to ionotropic nicotinic cholinergic receptors and glutamate receptors.
The receptors for NE and E were originally classified based on the observation that some physiological actions were mimicked by the catecholamine analog, isoproterenol, whereas others were not. This observation led to the convention that actions that could be mimicked by isoproterenol were classified as mediated by β-receptors. Those actions that were not mimicked by isoproterenol were classified as mediated by α-receptors.
This classification has since been extended to include subclasses of α and β receptors based on the capacity of drugs to selectively activate (or block) specific physiological responses to NE and E. The molecular cloning of mRNAs for distinct subclasses of NE and E receptors also aided in the classification of receptors. Tables I, II and III summarize autonomic and CNS NE and E receptor types, their location and their physiological action. Noteworthy is the fact that most α receptor responses are excitatory, while most β responses are inhibitory (although some exceptions exist, e.g. cardiac muscle). Also, the α receptor is invariably linked to IP3 production, whereas the β receptor is associated with increased levels of cAMP.
The distribution of NE receptors in the CNS is complex and not yet well resolved. Generally, both α and β receptors are believed to be modulators of the actions of other neurotransmitters. As summarized in Table II, α1 receptors are often excitatory, acting via IP3. In contrast, α2 receptors are inhibitory acting via decreased levels of cAMP. β receptors are inhibitory and act through increased levels of cAMP (TABLE II). The anatomical location of the specific receptor subtypes is not yet clearly delineated.
In the CNS, dopamine receptors, designated by the letter D, are grouped into two large families based on cDNA-derived structural similarities, synaptic action and signaling mechanism (TABLE III). The D1 family (D1 and D5) increases cAMP level, and has a positive influence on the excitability of its target cell. The D2 family (D2, D3, and D4) decreases cAMP level and decreases the excitability of the target cell. As shown in Table III the two families of receptors appear to have similar anatomical distributions. However, this may be misleading. Future research will probably show that the location of the receptors is on distinct postsynaptic cells or on presynaptic versus postsynaptic sites.
All but one of the 5-HT receptors belongs to the G protein coupled receptor superfamily. The one exception is the 5-HT3 receptor, which is a ligand gated ion channel. As is apparent from the summary in Table IV, 5-HT mediated actions occur through the same types of second messenger mechanisms as cholinergic and catecholamine G protein linked receptors.
Two classes of 5-HT receptors, 5-HT1B and 5-HT1D, appear to predominantly act as autoreceptors to modulate the synthesis and release of 5-HT from the presynaptic terminal of serotonergic neurons. Other receptor types lead to an increase in the excitability of the target cell (5-HT2 and 5-HT4), while still others (5-HT1) decrease excitability. Interestingly, receptors that mediate increased excitability do so through at least three mechanisms, PLCβ stimulation, stimulation of adenylyl cyclase or the direct interaction of 5-HT with the ion channel to depolarize the membrane.
Three subtypes of histamine receptors have been identified. All three are G protein linked and all three are present in the CNS as well as the periphery. Thus far, only peripheral H receptors have been characterized (See Table V).
H1 receptors mediate the well-known physiological responses to histamine that occur in response to histamine liberation from mast cells. A large number of prescription and over the counter drugs, antihistamines, act by blocking H1 receptors. Because most H1 blockers also have a sedative effect and cause drowsiness, it appears likely that H1 receptors are also present in the CNS. Recently developed H1 blockers that do not cross that blood brain barrier have circumvented the sedative problem.
The mechanism of action of H1 receptors is the activation of PLCβ.
H2 receptors are responsible for the peripheral actions of histamine that are not blocked by H1 antagonists. These receptors are coupled to stimulation of cAMP and are responsible for histamine's stimulation of gastric acid secretion. Recently developed specific H2 receptor blockers, Tagamet and Zantac, are effective clinically for excess secretion of gastric acid. Because these drugs do not cross the blood brain barrier, they have no effects on the CNS.
H3 histamine receptors are found on histamine nerve terminals where they regulate the release of histamine. There is evidence for these receptors on the terminals of other neurotransmitter types as well, indicating that histamine may regulate the synthesis and secretion of other neurotransmitters. When presynaptic receptors are located on cells other than their own neurotransmitter type they are called heteroreceptors.
The major mechanism for the inactivation of secreted MA is the reuptake into the nerve terminal from which the MA was released. Under conditions of very high neuronal activity, the MA will also be taken up by neighboring glial cells and will overflow into the capillaries perfusing the CNS. Under all three situations, a portion of the MA will be metabolized by enzymes that inactivate the MA, converting them to inactive products. As described below, measurement of these metabolites is used clinically and in research to monitor the activity of the MA systems.
High affinity transport (reuptake) into axon terminals is the main process of inactivation of released monoamines. Reuptake requires sodium ions and a source of energy (e.g., ATP) and is mediated by a protein carrier located on the plasma membrane of the monamine neurons. Tricyclic antidepressants and cocaine inhibit the transporters for DA, NE and 5-HT. Within the past ten years the structure of several MA transporters has been determined and shown to consist of a twelve transmembrane protein with both the N and C terminal ends residing within the cytoplasm (Figure 12.11). The powerful addictive drugs cocaine and amphetamine increase the level of MA neurotransmitters in the extracellular space. Cocaine acts by blocking the transport of MA (Figure 12.11) neurotransmitters into the terminal and as a consequence increases MA in the extracellular space. In contrast, amphetamine reverses the transport direction (Figure 12.11), transporting MA neurotransmitters out of the nerve terminal.
A low affinity uptake of monoamines into surrounding glial cells also inactivates released monoamines. Because this process acts only at very high concentrations of monoamines, it is believed to only come into play when the concentration of released neurotransmitter is very high.
A portion of released catecholamines diffuse to the extracellular space where monoamine oxidase (MAO) and/or catechol-0-methyl-transferase (COMT) eventually catabolize it. This route of inactivation is more prominent following extremely high levels of catecholaminergic neuronal activity.
Catecholamines and 5-HT: The enzymatic metabolism of MA neurotransmitters is carried out by MAO, COMT and histamine methyl transferase. These enzymes are widely distributed in tissues.
Monoamine Oxidase (MAO): This metabolic enzyme is located on the outer membrane of the mitochondrion and metabolizes DA, NE and 5-HT by oxidative deamination of (see Figure 12.12) to the corresponding aldehyde (DHPA, DHPGA and 5HIAA, respectively). DHPA and PHPGA are aldehyde intermediates that must be further metabolized by aldehyde reductase or dehydrogenase to alcohols and acids, respectively. These metabolites are excreted (see Table VI below), or further metabolized by methylation through the action of catechol-O-methyltransferase and then excreted (see below). Pargyline, an irreversible inhibitor of MAO, blocks monoamine degradation.
Catechol-O-methyl-transferase (COMT): This extraneuronal enzyme inactivates catecholamines by methylation of the hydroxyls on the catechol ring. COMT methylates either catecholamines that have already been metabolized by MAO or those that have not. The metabolites of catecholamines are shown in Table VI.
Measurement of MA metabolites in CSF, blood or urine provides a useful clinical index of the rate of release or turnover of MA neurotransmitters. Metabolites of catecholamines and serotonin are assayed in the CSF to obtain an index of brain metabolites. This method has been only modestly useful in determining the role of a specific MA neurotransmitters in brain disorders. Likewise, specific catecholamine metabolites in urine or the blood provide an index of peripheral sympathetic neurons and adrenal medullary catecholamines. The metabolites that are routinely measured clinically to assess CNS and peripheral catecholamine function are summarized in Table VI. Two CSF metabolites provide a measure of central DA function: 1) HVA, a methylated DA metabolite (metabolized by both MAO and COMT), and 2) DOPAC, an un-methylated metabolite, (metabolized by only MAO). The CSF metabolite that is measured to assess central NE function is MHPG, a methylated NE metabolite (metabolized by MAO and COMT). The metabolite that provides the best index of autonomic nervous system activity is VMA, a methylated NE metabolite (metabolized by both MAO and COMT). Metanephrine levels are monitored to assess the relative activity of the adrenal medulla or a tumor of this tissue, phaeochromocytoma. 5-HIAA reflects the activity of 5-HT cells.
Histamine: The metabolism of HA is somewhat different than the other MA. HA is taken up into cells where it is first methylated by histamine methyltransferase (HMT) to form telemethylhistamine. MAO subsequently oxidizes telemethylhistamine to the histamine metabolite, telemethylimadazole (TMI).
DA is involved in a number of important physiological functions including motor control, coordinating autonomic function, and regulating hormone release and motivation. The role of DA systems in motivated behavior is of particular importance.
DA appears to be involved in at least two phases of motivated behavior: an appetite phase and a consumption phase. The ventral striatum, particularly the nucleus accumbens, has been shown to be actively involved in appetitive aspects of motivation. For example, food deprived animals with lesions of the nucleus accumbens fail to show an appetitive behavior when presented with food. The consumption of the food, in contrast, is unimpaired by these lesions. On the other hand, the dorsal striatum, particularly the caudate-putamen, appears to be involved in consummatory aspects of motivated behavior. Lesions in this region disrupt motivated behavior. Animals with lesions in this region will approach food but will not consume it. These and other observations have led to the proposition that DA mediates a performance activating effect of motivated behavior, as well as conveying internal reward signals. These characteristics of DA neurotransmission make it an extremely important neurotransmitter in motivational behavior as well as in the neuropharmacology of reward. Importantly, DA neurotransmission is hypothesized to be at the heart of the mechanisms of ALL addictive-drugs and behaviors. A pertinent example of DA's role is illustrated by both cocaine and amphetamine, two abused drugs that act by increasing the concentration of DA in the synaptic space.
NE, like DA, is involved in a broad range of physiological functions and behaviors. One of the most important is its role in attention and arousal.
NE neurons appear to be involved in the regulation of an organism's vigilance. The broad projection of the locus coeruleus (LC) makes it especially well suited to act as a mechanism to alert cortical and thalamic areas to incoming sensory stimuli. The LC is electrophysiologically quiet during low vigilance states such as sleep or in the lack of sensory input. When exposed to a strong stimulus, the LC markedly increases its firing rate, however. The broad influence of the activated LC is to filter weak stimuli and enhance moderate stimuli. This filtering and enhancement by NE is believed to aid in CNS processing of sensory information. In support of this conclusion, the application of NE to cortical neurons reduces responsiveness to weak stimuli, and enhances responses to strong stimuli. α2 receptors appear to be important for these responses.
Serotonin is a key neurotransmitter in a number of physiological regulatory mechanisms and behaviors, including appetite, sleep, and aggression.
Serotonin is important in the regulation of appetite, and appears to act in a pathway that monitors the carbohydrate intake, acting as a negative regulator of the motivation to ingest carbohydrate. This response appears to be mediated by 5-HT in the hypothalamus and has led to the use of serotonin uptake blockers, such as fenfluramine, as obesity pills (Table VII).
Many clinical observations and animal behavioral studies support the conclusion that serotonin is an important factor in aggressive behavior and the expression of dominance versus submissive behavior. For example the use of pharmacological agents to decrease levels of 5-HT at synapses in animal studies consistently demonstrates that low 5-HT is associated with both increased aggressiveness and decreased dominance. Similarly, the measurement of 5-HT metabolites in CSF and blood of patients or experimental animals shows that low 5-HIAA predicts aggressiveness as well as risk taking and a lower social rank. This correlation between decreased 5-HT activity and increased aggression was recently supported by the observation that 5-HT1B receptor knock-out mice have a marked increase in aggressive behavior.
MA neurotransmitters are prominent participants in the etiology of many PNS and CNS disorders. Described below are several of the more prominent examples. Some of the many neuropharmacological agents that are used to treat these disorders are contained in Table VII.
MA neurotransmitters are prominent participants in the etiology of many PNS and CNS disorders. Described below are several of the more prominent examples. Some of the many neuropharmacological agents that are used to treat these disorders are contained in Table VII.
Schizophrenia. The DA theory of schizophrenia is based on the observation that DA antagonists are effective antipsychotic drugs. Their capacity to inhibit DA receptors correlates well with their antipsychotic efficacy. Currently, clinical studies are attempting to develop DA antagonists with specific DA receptor subtype efficacy that will most effectively decrease the antipsychotic symptoms without influencing other DA actions, such as movement control. As mentioned in the anatomy section, an overactivity of the mesolimbic DA system appears especially prominent in schizophrenia.
Disorders of Movement Control. It is now well accepted that decreased DA in the substantia nigra and striatum is the critical lesion in Parkinson's disease. Autopsy shows that nearly all DA is lost during the course of this disease, apparently due to the degeneration of DA neurons. l-DOPA is used to treat this disease's symptoms because it can be converted to DA by AADC in the cells in the vicinity of the degenerated nerve endings to replace the missing endogenous DA. Some preparations of l-DOPA include a pherpheral AADC inhibitor so that more of the l-DOPA will be available for transport into the CNS. Conversion of l-DOPA into DA in the blood prevents its transport into the CNS. Other drugs that are effective in treating Parkinson's symptoms are DA agonists, as well as MAO and COMT inhibitors.
Affective Disorders. NE is believed to be involved in the etiology of some unipolar and bipolar affective disorders. This conclusion is based to a large degree on the observation that drugs that are effective in treating depression are also good at either 1) preventing the metabolism of NE (MAO inhibitors), or 2) preventing the the removal of NE from the extracellular space by uptake into nerve endings. There is also evidence that the levels of the CNS NE metabolites are lower in depressed patients and higher during the manic phase of bipolar disorder in manic patients.
Autonomic or Smooth Muscle Dysfunction. Drugs that interact with NE receptors are widely used to treat disorders involving autonomic or smooth muscle dysfunction such as asthma, coronary heart disease, angina pectoris, ventricular arrhythmias, migraine and hyperthyroidism. (See Table VI).
Affective Disorders. Low levels of 5-HT and metabolites are associated with depression and especially a type of depression that is more likely to lead to suicide. Several studies have shown reduced 5-HT in brains of suicide victims as well as a low 5HIAA in CSF of depressed patients who have high incidence of suicide attempts. Recent studies indicate that this type of 5-HT influence may start early in life; low levels of 5HIAA have been found in children and adolescents with disruptive behavioral disorders. Some of the drugs that are effective antidepressant treatments are nonspecific with respect to their relative influence on NE versus 5-HT disposition, thus it has been difficult to know for certain which monoamine is responsible for the treatment effects. More recently selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (termed SSRIs) have been introduced for the treatment of depression that are among the more effective drugs available for this purpose.
Obsessive Compulsive Disorder. 5-HT dysfunction has been associated with obsessive compulsive disorder. Accordingly, selective 5-HT uptake blockers are used as a therapy for this condition.
Aggression. Although controversial, 5-HT reuptake blockers are used for the treatment of aggression.
Eating Disorders. Also controversial is the use of the drug fenfluramine to treat eating disorders because of the toxic effects that occur in some individuals. Fenfluramine blocks 5-HT reuptake into nerve terminals.
Schizophrenia. A number of recently introduced antipsychotic drugs are producing favorable results in treating the symptoms of schizophrenia. These drugs are interesting pharmacologically in that they block both DA and 5-HT receptors as well as ACh and HA (Table VII, Olanzapine).
Migraine Headaches. 5-HT1 agonists are used for the treatment of migraine headache.
Insomnia. The role of 5-HT in sleep regulation has lead to the hypothesis that reduced levels 5-HT may induce insomnia. Some clinicians are treating patients with 5-HT uptake blockers for this ailment.
Insomnia. The most popular treatment for insomnia is the use of over the counter CNS acting antihistamines.
Amino acid transmitters provide the majority of excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmission in the nervous system. The sensory-to-motor neuron connection in the spinal cord that controls the knee-jerk reflex is an excellent starting point for illustration. Figure 13.1 shows a monosynaptic connection in the spinal cord between the sensory neuron (in green) and the motor neuron innervating the extensor muscle (in blue).
A single action potential evoked in the sensory neuron produces an excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) in the extensor motor neuron (Figure 13.1) of about 1 mV. The same sensory neuron also makes a synaptic connection with an interneuron (in black) in the spinal cord that then synapses on the motor neuron (in red) innervating the flexor muscle. An action potential elicited in the interneuron produces an inhibitory postsynaptic potential (IPSP) in the flexor motor neuron. Recall that many EPSPs are needed to drive the motor neuron's resting potential to the threshold to generate an action potential. These are the processes of temporal and spatial summation. The neurotransmitters and the receptors that mediate these and other excitatory and inhibitory responses are the focus of this section. Excitatory transmission (the production of EPSPs) is mediated largely by the acidic amino acid glutamate. Inhibitory neurotransmission (IPSPs) is mediated primarily by glycine in the spinal cord, and a metabolite of glutamate called gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) in the brain.
Neurons receive many thousands of synaptic inputs some excitatory, some inhibitory, and some modulatory. Excitatory synaptic connections are typically found on the major receiving area of the neuron, the dendrite, and most often on spines that project from the dendrite (Figure 13.2). These excitatory synapses have identifiable morphological characteristics and are referred to as Type I (Figure 13.2, box labeled Dendrites). A distinct zone frequently exists in the pre-synaptic terminal of Type I synapses responsible for the release of vesicles containing glutamate and a corresponding zone under the postsynaptic membrane that serves to anchor the receptors for glutamate (click on the box for details). In addition, vesicles that contain glutamate are small (~50 nm in diameter) and tend to have a spherical appearance.
Inhibitory synapses (like those utilizing glycine and GABA) tend to be localized near the neuronal soma and are referred to as Type II (Figure 13.2, box labeled Axosomatic synapse). Morphologically, the synapses again have specializations for release of vesicles and for anchoring receptors. However, the zones of contact tend to be smaller than for excitatory synapses (click on the box for more details). For unknown reasons, the vesicles containing glycine or GABA are often elliptical in shape.
Functionally, the location of these synaptic contacts has profound influences on the postsynaptic neuron. In general, the further from the cell body, the more the EPSP is attenuated by the passive properties of the membrane (these potentials are not propagating action potentials; they are synaptic potentials). Therefore, for neurons lacking regenerative processes in their dendrites, EPSPs that are far from the point of action potential generation (the cell soma and axon hillock) attenuate to a greater degree than IPSPs which are generated closer to the neuron's soma. Due to this spatial arrangement and the relatively small size of each EPSP (1 mV), many distant EPSPs must summate to cause the initiation of an action potential. In contrast, fewer local IPSPs on the cell soma are required to inhibit production of action potentials. On a typical cortical neuron, one might find 10,000 axodendritic excitatory synapses and only 10-50 axosomatic inhibitory synapses.
Initially, amino acids were not considered viable candidates for neurotransmitters since they are ubiquitous cellular constituents and are required for protein synthesis. Also, unlike the specific enzymes in neurons that synthesize ACh and catecholamines, enzymes that synthesize glutamate, aspartate and glycine are not unique to neurons. Whereas antibodies to choline acetyltransferase can be used to identify neurons as cholinergic, no such markers are available for neurons that use the amino acids as transmitters. Nevertheless, it is now known that amino acids constitute the major group of substances used for generating excitatory and inhibitory synaptic potentials in the CNS. Amino acids used for synaptic transmission are compartmentalized. For example, glutamate to be used as a neurotransmitter is compartmentalized from metabolic glutamate used for protein synthesis by packaging the transmitter into synaptic vesicles for subsequent Ca2+-dependent release.
Amino acid neurotransmitters are all products of intermediary metabolism with the exception of GABA. Unlike all the other amino acid neurotransmitters, GABA is not used in protein synthesis and is produced by an enzyme (glutamic acid decarboxylase; GAD) uniquely located in neurons. Antibodies to GAD can be used to identify neurons that release GABA.
Glutamate and aspartate are products of the Kreb's cycle, and both have excitatory effects in the CNS. They are produced in the mitochondria, transported into the cytoplasm, and packaged into synaptic vesicles (Figure 13.4). Specific high-affinity enzymes are responsible for packaging glutamate into vesicles.
The actions of glutamate are terminated by high-affinity uptake systems in neurons and glia (represented by red cylinders in the neuron and glia membranes). Under normal circumstances most uptake is back into the neuron and this glutamate can immediately be pumped into vesicles for subsequent release. When neuronal activity is high, extracellular glutamate concentration exceeds the capacity of neuronal uptake. At this point, uptake systems in glial cells help absorb the excess glutamate. However, glutamate is not permeable to the plasma membrane. To recycle the glutamate taken up into glial cells, an enzymatic reaction catalyzed by glutamine synthase produces glutamine from glutamate (Figure 13.4). Glutamine is freely permeable to the glial and neuronal plasma membranes and diffuses back into the neuron. The neuronal enzyme glutaminase then metabolizes glutamine into glutamate where it can then be packaged into synaptic vesicles for another round of release (Figure 13.4).
Glycine is the main neurotransmitter that mediates the inhibitory actions of spinal cord interneurons. It is also present in lower amounts throughout the nervous system. Glycine is synthesized from serine in the mitochondria (Figure 13.5). The reaction is catalyzed by the enzyme serine transhydroxymethylase (Figure 13.5; click on box). Like glutamate, high-affinity uptake systems remove glycine from the synaptic cleft, which can then be repackaged into vesicles.
The binding of glycine to its receptor on postsynaptic neurons is blocked by the poison strychnine, thus blocking glycine's inhibitory actions (Figure 13.5). The block of inhibition leads to hyperexcitation and typically a patient with strychnine poisoning asphyxiates due to an inability to relax the diaphragm. More details on the nature of glycine receptors are provided later in this chapter. (You can move forward to it now, but be aware that you are advancing FORWARD.)
GABA mediates the majority of inhibitory synaptic actions in the CNS. GABA is synthesized from glutamate in a reaction catalyzed by glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD; Figure 13.6). Antibodies to GAD can be used to identify GABAergic neurons. Like the other amino acid transmitters, GABA's actions are terminated by high affinity uptake systems in neurons and glia. Neuronal uptake permits immediate repackaging into vesicles for release. Compared with glutamate, a more elaborate set of reactions is necessary to return GABA to the neuron when it is taken up by glial cells. Some of these enzymes are shared with those for returning released glutamate to neurons described in Figure 13.4. GABA is first converted back into glutamate by the mitochondrial enzyme GABA transaminase (GABA-T; Figure 13.6; click on box) using the -COOH group from alpha-ketoglutarate. This pathway is sometimes referred to as the "GABA shunt". The glutamate is then converted to glutamine by the enzyme glutamine synthase and glutamine diffuses back into the neuron. Finally, glutaminase converts glutamine into glutamate, which can again serve as a substrate for GAD, completing the cycle.
All of these amino acid neurotransmitters are released by Ca2+-dependent exocytosis at presynaptic specializations as discussed in Chapter 8, Part 7 and Chapter 10, Part 4. All vesicles (both small molecule and neuropeptide) also contain ATP that is co-released when these vesicles fuse with the membrane. ATP and its degradation product adenosine are themselves neurotransmitter molecules (termed purinergic transmission) that can also modify the pre- or postsynaptic cell's response if the appropriate receptors are present. For example, adenosine is a potent inhibitor of neurotransmitter release from presynaptic terminals.
Receptors for each of the amino acid neurotransmitters can either directly open an ion channel (ionotropic) or couple to a G-protein (G-protein coupled receptor; GPCR) except for glycine. There is no known GPCR for glycine and all of glycine's effects are mediated through an ion channel permeable to Cl-. In contrast, glutamate and GABA can produce fast responses by directly opening ion channels and can produce slow responses by activating receptors coupled to G-proteins. Examples of ionotropic receptors and GPCRs are compared in Figures 13.7 and 13.8, respectively.
There are at least three distinct types of glutamate receptors. Two are ionotropic since glutamate binding directly opens an ion channel and the other is a GPCR, producing alterations in intracellular messengers (Figures 13.7 and 13.8). These three distinct types of glutamate receptors have been characterized by using agonists that specifically activate each type. The agonists and the subset of glutamate receptors they activate are termed:
NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate, a synthetic compound that acts as an agonist for this particular glutamate receptor subtype),
non-NMDA (also known as kainate/AMPA receptors since these agonists activate this receptor subtype), and
G-protein coupled glutamate receptor.
Ionotropic glutamate receptors open channels that cause the cell to depolarize and are therefore excitatory (driving the membrane potential towards firing an action potential). The reversal potential (near 0 mV) of the EPSP indicates that glutamate opens receptors selectively permeable to cations (Na+, K+, and Ca2+).
Opening of non-NMDA receptors causes the majority of the excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs) in the nervous system. This receptor is mainly permeable to Na+ and K+ (Figure 13. 9). The structure of non-NMDA receptors loosely resembles the nicotinic ACh receptor, although glutamate receptors have some unique features. Four subunits, each having only three membrane spanning segments (as opposed to four for the nicotinic ACh receptor), combine to produce the functional receptor. Many different subunit isoforms have been cloned and characterized and mixing different subunits can significantly alter the properties of the mature non-NMDA receptor. As one example, some subunit mixtures are permeable to Ca2+ as well as Na+ and K+. Although it is premature to dwell on these details, future development of drugs that bind to specific glutamate receptor subtypes will find important clinical applications.
NMDA receptors are unique in the nervous system and exhibit two important characteristics. First, they have a high permeability to Ca2+ (although they are also permeable to Na+ and K+), and when they open significant increases in the level of Ca2+ can be detected in the neuron (Figure 13.10). Increased levels of Ca2+ activate a wide variety of enzyme systems that alter both the short- and long-term response of the neurons (recall that activation of this receptor is required for the induction of long-term potentiation). Glycine, which is normally always present in the extracellular space, is also required for the NMDA receptor to open. Second, NMDA receptors require both ligand binding and membrane depolarization to open. The channel associated with the NMDA receptor binds Mg2+, stopping ions from flowing through the channel (Figure 13.10). Mg2+ can be displaced from the channel by depolarizing the membrane. This unique property imparts to the receptor the capacity to sense the membrane potential and open only when the neuron is depolarized. The ability to sense presynaptic activity (through the binding of released glutamate) and postsynaptic activity (through sensing membrane potential) means the NMDA receptor associates the two activities. This property (associativity) fulfills one of the central criteria for a molecule involved in learning. Apparently, Ca2+-influx through the NMDA receptor initiates a set of biochemical changes so that the neuron remembers the conjoint activity and responds differently when activated in the future. Like the non-NMDA receptor, the mature NMDA receptor is constructed from a mixture of different subunits, again each having three transmembrane segments.
GABA and glycine ionotropic receptors are selectively permeable to Cl- (reversal potential near -70 mV). When they open, they cause the neuron to hyperpolarize and therefore drive the membrane potential away from the threshold for firing an action potential. GABA, like glutamate, also binds to and activates a GPCR. In contrast, glycine only binds to ionotropic receptors.
The GABAA receptor is composed of five subunits that each contain four membrane spanning domains. GABAA subunits are highly related to those of the nicotinic ACh receptor. Important differences exist to produce a channel that permits the permeation of the negatively charged Cl- ion. Specifically, there are positively charged amino acids placed at strategic positions within the channel portion of the receptors that permit Cl- passage. The different subunits of the GABAA receptor are responsible for the binding of different drugs.
GABA binds predominantly to the alpha subunit (Figure 13.11).
Benzodiazepines (like Valium and Librium) bind to the gamma subunit.
Barbiturates (Phenobarbital and secobarbital) bind to both the alpha and beta subunits.
Picrotoxin blocks ion flow through the receptor (Figure 13.11).
The pharmacology of GABAA receptors is complex and clinically important. When GABA is released into the synapse, it binds to a population of the available receptors, but typically not all of them (Figure 13.12). If benzodiazepines are present, the effectiveness of GABA binding to its receptor is increased significantly (Figure 13.13). Therefore, effective doses of benzodiazepines enhance the ability of GABA to hyperpolarize the neuron by increasing the number of GABA receptors that open at a fixed concentration of GABA. Inhibition is produced by increasing the amount of Cl- that flows into the neuron (Figure 13.12 and 13.13). Recognize that benzodiazepines themselves do not open the receptor but simply enhance GABA binding. Barbiturates also produce their sedative effects by increasing the effectiveness of GABA binding to its receptor. The naturally occurring toxin called picrotoxin is a potent inhibitor of the GABAA receptor and works by preventing Cl- flow through the receptor (Figure 13.11).
The glycine receptor, like the GABAA receptor also permits the influx of Cl- into neurons and displays a reversal potential near -70 mV. This Cl--permeable glycine receptor can be blocked by the rat poison strychnine. The mature glycine receptor is constructed from mixtures of at least two subunits each of which has four membrane spanning domains.
Glutamate GPCRs are members of a large family of receptors that couple with G proteins to produce their effects. These receptors like those for serotonin, norepinephrine, epinephrine, muscarinic ACh, and dopamine, produce the large majority of their effects through alterations in the activity of metabolic enzymes and not by directly opening ion channels in the membranes. All of these receptors are single polypeptides that span the membrane seven times (See Fig. 11.10. and Fig. 13.8).
The glutamate GPCR's best known effects are the activation of phospholipase C which generates inositol-trisphosphate (IP3) and diacylglycerol (DAG) from the precursor lipid phosphatidylinositol bisphosphate (See Figure 13.8). Inositol-trisphosphate binds to receptors on intracellular organelles causing the release of Ca2+. Among several other things, increased Ca2+ along with diacylglycerol lead to the activation of protein kinase C which produces a variety of alterations in the enzymatic machinery of the cell including the regulation of ion channels that affect the electrical properties of the neuron.
The GABAB receptor, like the glutamate GPCR, produces its effects not by directly opening ion channels, but by coupling to G-proteins and enzymes that influence metabolites within the neuron. Reported effects include alterations (either increases or decreases) in cAMP levels, increases in K+-conductance, and decreases in Ca2+-conductance. Some of the ion channel effects detected are due to the components of the activated G-protein binding directly to ion channels, influencing their properties (See Figure 6.5).
Two basic mechanisms, diffusion and high affinity uptake, terminate the response to amino acid transmitters. The high affinity uptake mechanism is the most predominant. The proteins involved in transmitter uptake are related and each contains 12 membrane-spanning domains. Transporters use energy derived either from the hydrolysis of ATP or electrochemical ion gradients established across the membrane to pump the transmitters into neurons and glia. The energy-dependent nature of these receptors means that in times of metabolic stress, such as during an ischemic episode, the pumps fail and toxic levels of these transmitters build up.
The neurotransmitter glutamate is highly toxic to neurons when present for extended periods. One of the best understood clinical conditions involving glutamate is neuronal injury following stroke or trauma. Both events produce massive release of glutamate in the brain that over-stimulates glutamate receptors. The absence of energy prevents the pumps from removing glutamate from the synapse. As a consequence, the uncontrolled opening of glutamate receptors causes a large influx of Na+ followed by water that produces swelling and a large and sustained influx of Ca2+ that leads to hyperactivation of many calcium-dependent enzymes. The Ca2+ influx through the NMDA receptor appears to be one of the keys to producing neuronal damage since specifically blocking activation of this receptor attenuates some of the neuronal injury following stroke. The key to minimizing damage following stroke is well-controlled reestablishment of blood flow so that ATP production is supported and homeostasis is reestablished. Clot breaking agents such as tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) are now used commonly to reestablish blood flow.
Because glutamate is the major excitatory transmitter in the human brain, derangements in glutamate metabolism or receptor activation have been implicated in a wide variety of pathologic conditions. These include diseases such as Alzheimer's and Huntington's chorea.
One explanation for the establishment of focal epilepsy is decreased local GABA-mediated inhibition. Many facets of epilepsy can be elicited experimentally by blocking GABA receptors with the toxin picrotoxin previously described. The decrease in GABA inhibition permits cells to fire synchronously, thus producing massive local excitation and initiation of a seizure. Clinically, seizures can often be terminated by inducing a barbiturate coma. High dose barbiturates presumably potentiate GABA's inhibitory effects, preventing local hyperexcitation by hyperpolarizing the cell membranes.
Mood disorders (generalized anxiety disorder) can also be controlled by drugs which potentiate GABA's inhibitory activity. Some of the most widely prescribed drugs-benzodiazepines (Librium and Valium)-produce their pharmacological effects by increasing GABA's ability to hyperpolarize neuronal membranes, thereby quieting the system. This finding suggests that some initial imbalance in the GABAergic system may underlie aspects of this disorder.
Classical neurotransmitters (e.g., glutamate and ACh) work by the directional transfer of information between presynaptic release sites and postsynaptic clusters of receptors. The process is generally well organized spatially with some, but very limited, "spill-over" of transmitter between neighboring synapses. The situation is quite different for transmission mediated by neuropeptides and nitric oxide (NO). These molecules ignore directionality of information flow and instead influence a volume of area from their point of release. This feature is loosely analogous to the release of peptide hormones into the blood stream, which can be carried to distant sites to produce their effects. For example, NO can be produced in a postsynaptic neuron and diffuse back to the presynaptic neuron or to other neighboring neurons affecting the subsequent release of transmitter. This property is termed retrograde transmission, since the signal travels in the opposite direction (post- to pre-) as compared to the classical directionality of neurotransmission.
Many neuropeptides were originally described as hormones (e.g., somatostatin and cholecystokinin), although once characterized they were subsequently also found in neurons within the CNS. Neuropeptides typically produce neuronal responses with slow onset and long duration (Figure 14.1), and every characterized neuropeptide receptor falls into the GPCR (G-protein coupled receptor) class. For comparison, Figure 14.1 shows typical responses produced by the action of a classical neurotransmitter (glutamate) acting at an ionotropic receptor and a neuropeptide. An action potential elicited in neuron 1 (in green), a glutamate releasing neuron, produces the fast (5 msec) EPSP typical of glutamate mediated synaptic transmission. In contrast, an action potential elicited in neuron 2 (purple) that releases neuropeptide produces a slow onset (5 sec to peak) and long-duration (10 sec) EPSP. These slow EPSPs are typical of neuropeptide actions since all neuropeptide receptors are G-protein coupled.
In addition, many neuropeptides do not produce an obvious electrophysiological change in the postsynaptic neuron. For example, an action potential in neuron 3 (Figure 14.1; pink) produces no response in the postsynaptic neuron even though one can confirm through other means that neuropeptides were released. However, changes have occurred in the postsynaptic neuron as revealed in the example shown in the panels labeled "C". If one first measures the glutamate response (C1) by stimulating neuron 1, a typical response is seen. Stimulation of neuron 3 produces no response (C2) as before. However, if neuron 1 is stimulated again after the stimulation of neuron 3, the EPSP measured in the postsynaptic neuron is enhanced (C3) (the original EPSP is the solid line and the EPSP following neuron 3 stimulation is the dashed line). Thus, the neuropeptide released from neuron 3 altered the postsynaptic neuron's response to another neurotransmitter. These neuropeptides are said to be neuromodulators since their effects are to potentiate or depress the effects of a second transmitter. Other examples of such heterosynaptic plasticity are described in Chapter 7, Part 2.
Neuropeptides can be grouped into families based on similarities in their amino acid sequences (Tables I and II).
For example, opiates are grouped as a family due to the identical amino acid sequence Tyr-Gly-Gly-Phe--(Table II) found at the N-terminus of each.
Neuropeptides are derived from larger precursors by proteolytic processing. They are all initially synthesized within the soma (Figure 14.2). Precursors are initially formed by translation on polyribosomes attached to the endoplasmic reticulum near the cell body. From there, they progress through the Golgi apparatus where further modifications take place, including glycosylation. They are then packaged into secretory granules that are transported to terminals by fast axonal transport. Fast is a relative term, however, and due to the relatively long distances that some neuropeptides must travel. Replenishing the pool of releasable neuropeptide might require many hours. During the transport to the nerve terminal, proteases that are packaged within the vesicle begin to cleave the precursor neuropeptide into its final mature form. This processing is essential for the activation of the neuropeptides since the precursors are biologically inactive. At least three types of processing occurs within the vesicles (Figure 14.2; click boxes for more details). First, an endopeptidase cleaves the precursor to generate two new products (First box in axon). For many precursors this cleavage occurs after basic residues (like Lys and Arg) and is accomplished by trypsin-like proteases. Next, although not for every neuropeptide, a carboxypeptidase cleaves the basic residues from the C-terminus of the new peptide (Second box in axon). Finally, a third enzyme converts the COOH (carboxy) group of a Gly residue, found at the C-terminus of many neuropeptides, to an NH2 (amide) group to produce the mature, active form of the neuropeptide.
Most proteins are produced from mRNA molecules that are spliced from precursor RNAs into their final forms in the nucleus. Differential splicing is one way that a neuron uses to diversify the production of different types of neuropeptides. One well-known example is the substance P mRNA that normally also includes mRNA encoding substance K. The substance K portion of the mRNA can be differentially spliced out so that the resulting mRNA can produce only substance P (click on box over nucleus in Figure 14.2)
Neuropeptides are produced from a longer precursor protein by proteolytic processing. An excellent example is the opioid family of peptides (e.g., the processing of proopiomelanocorticotropin, POMC and Enkephalin; see Figure 14.3). As noted, the proteolytic processing takes place within the transport vesicles and most often occurs by cleaving the precursor on the N-terminal side of basic residues (arginine and lysine), although other cleavage sites have also been identified. In some instances, such as the Enkephalin precursor protein, multiple copies of the same final bioactive peptide are present. The one precursor molecule shown at the top of Figure 14.3 contains six copies of Met-enkephalin (ME) and one copy of Leu-enkephalin (LE).
Diversity can thus be generated by altering the sequence of the cleavage sites by differential splicing, by producing and/or packaging different proteases (recognizing different sequences for cleavage) into the transport vesicles, or by hiding a proteolytic site by post-translational modifications. An example of the latter is that a specific cleavage site might be hidden by the addition of a carbohydrate side chain that sterically blocks the protease from having access to that site. Another common finding is that a single precursor molecule will contain several different neuropeptides (see Figure 14.3) and therefore the types of processing that occur ultimately determines which neuropeptide is released by the neuron. The POMC precursor protein can be cleaved to form ACTH (orange) and β-lipoprotein (light blue) that each can be further cleaved to generate additional bioactive neuropeptides (Figure 14.3). For example, the β-lipoprotein (light blue) can be further cleaved into both γ-lipoprotein (green stripes) and β-endorphin (dark blue). Again, depending on the processing that takes place, the same precursor protein can be modified to produce neuropeptides with dramatically different biological responses.
Peptides are released by calcium-dependent exocytosis with some important differences from the release of classical neurotransmitters. Typically, vesicles releasing neuropeptides are much larger than those that contain small molecule neurotransmitters (e.g., glutamate) and do not require a presynaptic specialization for release (see the electron micrograph in Figure 14.4). In contrast to the small vesicles that contain glutamate, the large vesicles do not appear docked at the membrane. This observation is consistent with the idea that small molecule neurotransmitters produce brief, local effects (at synaptic connections), whereas neuropeptides produce slow, long-lasting effects often encompassing a significant area surrounding the site of release. Also, recall that since neuropeptides are synthesized in the cell soma and not locally at the synapse, if their supply is exhausted from sustained release it might take several hours to replenish the releasable pools. For example, a motor neuron, with its cell body in the spinal cord and the synapse in the foot, has an axon as long as one meter. Utilizing fast axonal transport it would potentially take more than a day for a newly synthesized neuropeptide to arrive at this synapse from the soma. It should also be evident that endogenous pain-killing neuropeptides, like beta-endorphin, could be "used-up" in times of persistent stimulation leading to situations where pain can no longer be controlled by endogenous mechanisms.
A typical mature neuron will often release one small molecule neurotransmitter and one or more neuropeptides (as in the example shown in Figure 14.4). If more than one neuropeptide is released they most often come from the same single precursor molecule. An example is the co-release of both ACh and calcitonin gene-related peptide from spinal motor neurons. CGRP activates adenylate cyclase, raising cAMP levels, and potentiates the force of contraction produced by ACh activation of the nicotinic ACh receptor. In this case, the neuropeptide is modulatory as described in Figure 14.1. However, in this instance, the effect potentiates muscle contraction instead of increasing the magnitude of the EPSP. In both examples, the potentiated response is due to increased sensitivity of the system to a constant amount of released neurotransmitter.
Neuropeptides are slowly removed from the extracellular space; a feature which also contributes to their relatively long lasting effects. Inactivation occurs by both diffusion and breakdown by extracellular proteases. No evidence has been found for peptide re-uptake as a means of terminating their action.
All known neuropeptide receptors produce their effects by altering the levels of intracellular second messengers. These receptors are seven transmembrane spanning proteins that are linked through G proteins (GPCRs) to alter the activation of other cellular enzymes. This property is consistent with neuropeptides inducing a slower response and is well suited for a modulatory role. One important distinction between small and neuropeptide molecule transmitters is that neuropeptide receptors have a high affinity for binding (nanomolar) as opposed to micro- or millimolar affinities measured for small molecule neurotransmitters (like glutamate). As neuropeptides are not released directionally into the confined volume of a synapse, their concentrations do not achieve very high levels and the receptors then must have high affinities to react to these small concentrations. This high affinity slows the dissociation of the neuropeptide from its receptor and also contributes to the persistent effects of these molecules.
Nitric oxide has gained widespread attention as the founding member of a new class of gaseous messenger molecules. NO is the active molecule that sublingual nitroglycerin produces to increase vasodilation in the relief of angina. Other important biological effects of NO are now recognized. For example, in the nervous system, NO is important in the regulation of cerebral blood flow, in the modulation of neurotransmission, and in toxicity associated with various pathologic states.
NO is a short-lived gas not to be confused with the relatively stable anesthetic gas nitrous oxide (laughing gas). NO is actually a free radical and is therefore a highly reactive compound. Some of its toxic effects are likely due to NO reacting with superoxide to produce the destructive radical peroxynitrate. NO is considered an unconventional neurotransmitter because it is not released by exocytosis and its action does not occur through conventional receptor molecules.
As mentioned previously, the typical description of neuronal communication considers transmission to be unidirectional. A presynaptic neurotransmitter is released that produces changes in the postsynaptic neuron. Several compounds (like neuropeptides and NO) produced in postsynaptic neurons diffuse into the local environment and affect the surrounding cells. Since NO is a freely diffusible gas it has the potential to travel quickly in any direction from its point of production. For example, if produced in a postsynaptic cell because of glutamate receptor stimulation, NO could be released into the local environment and send a signal back to the presynaptic neuron (Figure 14.5). This type of activity is referred to as retrograde signaling since the signal travels in a retrograde direction from the postsynaptic to the presynaptic neuron.
NO is produced by the enzyme nitric oxide synthase (NOS). This enzyme is found in a subpopulation of neurons (1-2% of neurons in cortex) and is found in most all endothelial cells. At least one form of NOS in these cells is dependent on calcium and calmodulin for activation as indicated in Figures 14.5, 14.6, and 14.7. It also contains cofactors similar to cytochrome P-450. These cofactors are NADPH (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate, FAD (flavin adenine mononucleotide) and FMN (flavin mononucleotide). These cofactors are essential for the transfer of electrons that produces the unstable and short-lived product NO. The substrate in this reaction is the common amino acid arginine and the products are citrulline and NO (Figure 14.5). Because of NO's short lifetime it is extraordinarily difficult to measure directly. However, in experimental preparations, there is an excellent correlation between the application of NMDA, which increases intraneuronal Ca2+ and activates NOS, with the production of the additional product of NOS's enzymatic activity, citrulline (see Figure 14.8). Citrulline production is a reliable indicator of NO production. It is also possible to block the production of citrulline (and NO) by feeding cells the non-metabolizable substrate for NOS termed methyl arginine (Figure 14.9), and such compounds have been used to reduce the production of NO and terminate its biological effects.
One of the main targets for NO appears to be the enzyme guanylyl cyclase. This discovery was made indirectly by monitoring the accumulation of the NOS product citrulline while also monitoring for the production of cGMP, the product of the enzyme guanylyl cyclase (Figures 14.8 and 14.9). In this experiment NMDA was added to a neuronal preparation to activate NOS. NOS utilizes arginine as a substrate to produce NO and as mentioned, if a non-hydrolyzable analog like methyl-arginine is added to the system, citrulline and cGMP accumulation were found to terminate in the same dose-dependent fashion. These strong correlations led to the discovery that guanylyl cyclase is a main NO target.
Guanylyl cyclase is an unusual enzyme because it has a heme ring with an associated iron molecule as part of its structure. NO activates this enzyme by binding to iron in the heme, initiating production of cyclic GMP from GTP (Figure 14.10) through conformational changes in the enzyme. cGMP then activates a cGMP-dependent protein kinase and other enzymes described below. The spectrum of effects produced by the activation of cGMP-dependent protein kinase are only now becoming understood.
NO produces a wide variety of biological effects. Unfortunately, we are particularly ignorant of NO's role in modulating cellular processes in the nervous system. NO's role in regulating the vasculature is well documented and it appears to play a similarly important role in the nervous system.
Under normal circumstances, NO contributes to the control of blood flow through the cerebrovasculature. A rapid feedback mechanism necessarily exists to supply more active areas of the brain with the necessary nutrients. This mechanism is necessary because of the brain's feeble reserve of energy stores. NO is produced in neurons containing NOS that are undergoing sustained activity. These conditions favor activation of NMDA receptors, which is known to cause NO production. NO diffuses from these localized areas of high neuronal activity to the surrounding microvasculature (Figure 14.11) causing vasodilatation and increased blood flow.
Although the exact mechanisms by which NO produces vasodilatation are not yet defined, it is known that activation of cGMP-dependent protein kinase in smooth muscle cells causes a relaxation of the vessels. Since one of NO's main targets is guanylyl cyclase (which produces cGMP and activates cGMP-dependent protein kinase), it is presumed that one major pathway for NO's vasodilatory actions is through cGMP-dependent protein kinase. Activation of this kinase leads indirectly to decreased Ca2+-levels in the smooth muscle cells and subsequently to the dephosphorylation of the myosin contractile apparatus which causes relaxation (Figure 14.12). In smooth muscle cells, NO also appears to directly hyperpolarize cells possibly by activating K+-channels, leading to the secondary closure of Ca2+ channels which also produces muscle relaxation. In conclusion, one of NO's main functions appears to be integrating the level of neuronal activity with local alterations in cerebral blood flow to maintain adequate perfusion of metabolically active tissue.
NO is also thought to act as a locally diffusible messenger. It is produced by any action that elevates Ca2+ in cells containing NOS, such as glutamate stimulation of NMDA receptors. Through subsequent activation of guanylyl cyclase and production of cGMP, NO production influences a variety of secondary processes. These include direct modulation of ion channels, stimulation of cGMP-dependent protein kinase, and both up-regulation or down-regulation of cAMP-phosphodiesterase. Downstream effects are then numerous and include up and down regulation of Ca2+ channels, increased excitability (increases neuronal firing rate), increased or decreased neurotransmitter release, and changes in neuron morphology.
NO in excess is toxic to cells. However, a paradox exists for NO toxicity. Cells that produce high levels of NO are resistant to its toxic effects. For example, NO toxicity is used by macrophages and neutrophils as a mechanism to kill tumor cells and bacteria. However, neither cell type producing NO is susceptible to its damaging effects. This finding is also true for neurons in the central nervous system. Excess glutamate induces neurotoxicity in the brain and is thought to be the primary cause of neuronal death in diseases such as Huntington's or Alzheimer's or after acute stroke or trauma. Excess production of NO is thought to play some role in this neuronal loss due to its toxicity when produced in excess. Interestingly, cells that stain positive for the enzyme NOS are spared in degenerating areas of the brain affected by these diseases. The resistance of these cells appears to be similar to the resistance of the immune cells described above.
Genetic and physical map of the X chromosome. Association of a trait with a position on a given chromosome is a critical step in gene identification. The relationship between genetic loci is measured on a genetic map as the frequency of recombination events between the loci. On physical maps relationships between loci are measured in nucleotides. The genetic and physical maps have the same linear sequence although the distances are not correlated. After narrowing the chromosomal localization, a candidate gene can be localized on a genetic map that contains marker genes known to map to that chromosomal region. Subsequently, the gene can be localized on a physical map that allows delineation of its position with a higher degree of resolution.
A recombination frequency of 1% (1 cM or 1 centimorgan) means that two genes recombine on average once in every 100 meiotic events. This is equal to about 1000kb (1 Mb) of DNA sequence.
A recombination frequency of 1% (1 cM or 1 centimorgan) means that two genes recombine on average once in every 100 meiotic events. This is equal to about 1000kb (1 Mb) of DNA sequence.
Genes that are close to each other on a chromosome tend to be inherited together. This allows for the use of polymorphic loci near a candidate gene to be used as markers to examine whether they cosegregate with a phenotype (see linkage analysis below).
Association of a marker allele with a disease gene. A mutation (blue line) takes place that produces a disease gene. This mutation occurs in a DNA background that contains other polymorphisms. During subsequent meiotic events allelic markers that are further away from the mutation will segregate away from it, while those that are close by will cosegregate, allowing an association between the disease gene and the cosegregating polymorphic markers. The associated region will depend on the number of meiotic events occurring after the mutation and the probability of recombination events in this stretch of DNA.
A procedure by which any genetic trait is localized in the genome based on its segregation pattern with another marker or set of markers.
Recombination of homologous chromosomal segments
Frequency of recombination events depends on length of segments, the specific nucleotide sequence and its genomic location, and whether the event takes place in the male or female.
The consequence of recombination is that different offspring receive equal, but not identical, genetic information from each parent.
The genetic mapping of an unknown locus is established by examining the frequency with which it cosegregates with other previously mapped genetic markers. Mapping of anonymous markers and genes has allowed the construction of a fairly complete human genetic map. A number of disease genes with Mendelian phenotypes have been localized on the human linkage map to allow positional cloning. This has been helpful for linkage studies with traits that do not obey simple Mendelian patterns of inheritance.
Linkage analysis is a sequential procedure where data is collected until linkage is detected or refuted. Linkage is based on a LOD score-a statistical evaluation of a set of data that examines the probability of joint segregation of two markers with a given recombination distance under the assumption of linkage or no linkage.
The large majority of human diseases are NOT Mendelian (multigenic).
Familial aggregation of some genes (e.g., twins studies in schizophrenia) suggests both genetic and environmental factors contribute.
The large majority of human diseases are NOT Mendelian (multigenic).
Familial aggregation of some genes (e.g., twins studies in schizophrenia) suggests both genetic and environmental factors contribute.
How can it be determined whether a disease results from mutations in a single gene or multiple genes (polygenic)? Likely single gene diseases are those in which a single biochemical step is altered (e.g., some lipid storage disorders in which the inactivity of an enzyme leads to the accumulation of a precursor). Highly complex disorders (e.g., schizophrenia) are likely to be polygenic because of the wide-ranging disease phenotype.
Individuals have been identified who possess early- or late-onset AD phenotype. The early-onset phenotype exhibits near-Mendelian patterns of inheritance. Three genes and one locus were isolated: Amyloid precursor protein (APP), Presenilin-1 (PS-1), Presenilin-2 (PS-2), and apolipoprotein E (ApoE). APP and PS-1 were isolated from early-onset linkage studies while ApoE was from late-onset studies. PS-2 was identified from an ethnic isolate.
Huntington's disease follows an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. However, isolation of the gene underlying this disease was only possible by examining an isolated family in the Lake Maracaibo region of Venezuela. This family has 12,000 individuals, 258 have the disease, 1227 have 50% risk, 2885 have 25% risk and all are descendants from one woman who lived in the early 1800s. Linkage mapping enabled the localization of a single gene, the Huntington gene, that codes for the huntingtin protein. Mutations in the gene result in expanded triplet (CAG) repeats with the number of CAGs proportional to severity of symptoms which are motor and cognitive.
Disorders affecting midbrain dopamine neurons include Parkinson's disease and Huntington's disease. Huntington's disease is a single gene disease resulting from a mutation in the gene coding for huntingtin. In Huntington's disease, a population of neurons in the striatum degenerate presumably due to the presence of a mutated huntingtin protein. The mechanism by which this mutated protein produces cell death is being intensely studied but is not yet clear. The symptoms of Parkinson's disease result from the degeneration of midbrain dopamine neurons in the substantia nigra and ventral tegmental area that project to the striatum and nucleus accumbens. A candidate gene has been isolated but does not account for the entire phenotype.
Understanding that a particular gene underlies a phenotype is the first step in trying to provide therapeutic benefits to patients carrying a mutation. However, there are considerable obstacles to overcome between finding the gene and being able to "fix" the mutation. The strategy employed to functionally "fix" mutations leading to inactive or partially active proteins involves supplying the "correct" gene to the cells needing to produce the inactive protein.

The human nervous system is divided into the central nervous system (CNS) and the peripheral nervous system (PNS). The CNS, in turn, is divided into the brain and the spinal cord, which lie in the cranial cavity of the skull and the vertebral canal, respectively. The CNS and the PNS, acting in concert, integrate sensory information and control motor and cognitive functions.
The adult human brain weighs between 1,200 to 1,500 g and contains about one trillion cells. It occupies a volume of about 1400 cc - approximately 2% of the total body weight, and receives 20% of the blood, oxygen, and calories supplied to the body. The adult spinal cord is approximately 40 to 50 cm long and occupies about 150 cc. The brain and the spinal cord arise in early development from the neural tube, which expands in the front of the embryo to form the three primary brain divisions: the prosencephalon (forebrain), mesencephalon (midbrain), and rhombencephalon (hindbrain) (Figure 1.1A). These three vesicles further differentiate into five subdivisions: telencephalon, diencephalon, mesencephalon, metencephalon, and the myelencephalon (Figure 1.1B). The mesencephalon, metencephalon, and the myelencephalon comprise the brain stem.
The telencephalon includes the cerebral cortex (cortex is the outer layer of the brain), which represents the highest level of neuronal organization and function (Figures 1.2A and 1.2B). The cerebral cortex consists of various types of cortices (such as the olfactory bulbs, Figure 1.2B) as well as closely related subcortical structures such as the caudate nucleus, putamen, globus, amygdala and the hippocampal formation (Figure 1.2C).
The diencephalon consists of a complex collection of nuclei lying symmetrically on either side of the midline. The diencephalon includes the thalamus, hypothalamus, epithalamus and subthalamus (Figure 1.3).
The mesencephalon (or midbrain) consists of several structures around the cerebral aqueduct such as the periaqueductal gray (or central gray), the mesencephalic reticular formation, the substantia nigra, the red nucleus (Figure 1.4), the superior and inferior colliculi, the cerebral peduncles, some cranial nerve nuclei, and the projection of sensory and motor pathways.
The metencephalon includes the pons and the cerebellum. The myelencephalon (spinal cord-like) includes the open and closed medulla, sensory and motor nuclei, projection of sensory and motor pathways, and some cranial nerve nuclei.
The caudal end of the myelencephalon develops into the spinal cord. The spinal cord is an elongated cylindrical structure lying within the vertebral canal, which includes the central canal and the surrounding gray matter. The gray matter is composed of neurons and their supporting cells and is enclosed by the white matter that is composed of a dense layer of ascending and descending nerve fibers. The spinal cord is an essential link between the peripheral nervous system and the brain; it conveys sensory information originating from different external and internal sites via 31 pairs of spinal nerves (Figure 1.5). These nerves make synaptic connections in the spinal cord or in the medulla oblongata and ascend to subcortical nuclei.
The meninges are composed by three fibrous connective tissues (Figure 1.6). The most external is a dense collagenous connective tissue envelope known as the dura mater (Latin for “hard mother”). The second, or the intermediated membrane, is a delicate non-vascular membrane of fine collagenous layer of reticular fibers forming a web-like membrane, known as the arachnoid (Greek for “spider”). It is separated from the inner pia layer by subarachnoid space, which is filled with cerebrospinal fluid. The inner most delicate connective tissue membrane of collagenous is the pia mater, a thin translucent elastic membrane adherent to the surface of the brain and the spinal cord. Blood vessels located on the surface of the brain and the spinal cord are found on top of the pia matter. The meninges are subject to viral and bacterial infection known as meningitis, a life-threatening condition that requires immediate medical treatment.
The space between the skull and the dura is known as the epidural space. The space between the dura and the arachnoid is known as the subdural space. The space between the arachnoid and the pia is known as the subarachnoid space. In this space, there is a clear liquid known as the CSF. The CSF serves to support the CNS, and to cushion as well as protect it from physical shock and trauma. The CSF is produced by the choroid plexus, which is composed of a specialized secretory ependymal layer located in the ventricular system.
The space between the skull and the dura is known as the epidural space. The space between the dura and the arachnoid is known as the subdural space. The space between the arachnoid and the pia is known as the subarachnoid space. In this space, there is a clear liquid known as the CSF. The CSF serves to support the CNS, and to cushion as well as protect it from physical shock and trauma. The CSF is produced by the choroid plexus, which is composed of a specialized secretory ependymal layer located in the ventricular system.
In general, the CNS can be divided into three main functional components: the sensory system, the motor system, and homeostatic and higher brain functions. The sensory system consists of the somatosensory, viscerosensory, auditory, vestibular, olfactory, gustatory, and visual systems. The motor system consists of motor units, and the somatic (skeletal muscle) system, the spinal reflexes, the visceral (autonomic) system, the cerebellum, several subcortical and cortical sites, as well as the brain stem ocular motor control system. The homeostatic and higher functional system includes the hypothalamus, cortical areas involved in motivation, insight, personality, language, memory, imagination, creativity, thinking, judgment, mental processing, and subcortical areas involved in learning, thought, consciousness, memory, attention, emotional state, sleep and arousal cycles.
The largest and most obvious parts of the human brain are the cerebral hemispheres. The cerebrum has an outer layer - the cortex, which is composed of neurons and their supporting cells, and in living brain, has a gray color thus called the gray matter. Under the gray matter is the white matter, which is composed of myelinated ascending and descending nerve fibers, and in living brain have a white color. Embedded deep within the white matter are aggregates of neurons exhibiting gray color and known as subcortical nuclei. The cerebral hemispheres are partially separate from each other along the midline by the interhemispheric fissure (deep groove) the falx cerebri (Figure 1.8A); Posteriorly, there is a transverse fissure that separates the cerebral hemisphere from the cerebellum, and contains the tentorium cerebellum. The hemispheres are connected by a large C-shaped fiber bundle, the corpus callosum, which carries information between the two hemispheres.
For descriptive purposes each cerebral hemisphere can be divided into six lobes. Four of these lobes are named according to the overlying bones of the skull as follows: frontal, parietal, occipital and temporal (Figures 1.8A and 1.8B), the fifth one is located internally to the lateral sulcus – the insular lobes (Figure 1.8B and 1.8D), and the sixth lobe is the limbic lobe (Figure 1.8C) which contains the limbic system nuclei. Neither the insular lobe nor the limbic lobe is a true lobe. Although the boundaries of the various lobes are somewhat arbitrary, the cortical areas in each lobe are histologically distinctive.
The surface of the cerebral cortex is highly convoluted with folds (gyri), separate from each other by elongated grooves (sulci). These convolutions allow for the expansion of the cortical surface area without increasing the size of the brain. On the lateral surface of the cerebral hemisphere there are two major deep grooves-sulci (or fissure), the lateral fissure (of Sylvian) and the central sulci (of Rolando), these sulci provide landmarks for topographical orientation (Figure 1.9A). The central sulcus separates the frontal lobe from the parietal lobe and runs from the superior margin of the hemisphere near its midpoint obliquely downward and forward until it nearly meets the lateral fissure (Figures 1.8A and 1.8B). The lateral fissure, separating the frontal and parietal lobes from the temporal lobe, begins inferiorly in the basal surface of the brain and extends laterally posteriorly and upward, separating the frontal and parietal lobes from the temporal lobe (Figure 1.9A). The frontal lobe is the portion which is rostral to the central sulcus and above the lateral fissure, and it occupies the anterior one third of the hemispheres (Figures 1.8 and 1.9). The boundaries of the parietal lobe are not precise, except for its rostral border – the central sulcus. The occipital lobe is the portion which is caudal to the parietal lobe (Figures 1.8 and 1.9). Along the lateral surface of the hemisphere, an imaginary line connecting the tip of the parietal-occipital sulcus and the preoccipital notch (Figure 1.9A), separate the parietal lobe from the occipital lobe. On the medial surface of the hemisphere (Figure 1.9B), parieto-occipital sulcus forms the rostral boundary of the parietal lobe. The temporal lobe lies ventral to the lateral sulcus, and on its lateral surface, it displays three diagonal oriented convolutions-the superior, middle, and inferior temporal gyri (Figure 1.9A). The insula lies in the depths of the lateral sulcus. It has a triangular cortical area with gyri and sulci (Figures 1.8B and 1.8D, and Figure 1.9A). The limbic lobe consists of several cortical and subcortical areas (Figure 1.9B).
The cerebral cortex is a functionally organized organ. A functionally organized system is a set of neurons linked together to convey a specific type(s) of information to accomplish a particular task. It is possible to identify on the cerebral cortex primary sensory areas, secondary sensory areas, primary motor area, premotor area, supplementary motor area and association areas, which are devoted to the integration of motor and sensory information, intellectual activity, thinking and comprehension, execution of language, memory storage and recall.
The frontal lobe is the largest of the brain lobes and is comprised of four gyri, precentral gyrus that parallels the central sulcus, and three horizontal gyri: the superior, middle, and inferior frontal gyri. The inferior frontal gyrus is comprised of three parts: the orbital, the triangular and opercular. The term opercular refers to the “lips of the lateral fissure. Finally, the straight gyrus (gyrus rectus) and the orbital gyri form the base of the frontal lobe (Figure 1.9B). Four general functional areas are in the frontal lobe. They are the primary motor cortex, where all parts of the body are represented, the premotor and supplementary motor areas. A region concerned with the motor mechanisms of speech formulation comprised of the opercular and triangular parts of the inferior frontal gyrus are known as Broca’s speech area, and the remainder of the prefrontal cortex is involved in mental activity, personality insight, foresight, and reward. The orbital portion of the prefrontal cortex is important in the appropriate switching between mental sets and the regulation of emotion.
The parietal lobe is comprised of three gyri: postcentral gyrus, superior and inferior parietal gyri (Figure 1.9A). The postcentral gyrus is immediately behind the central sulcus which forms its anterior boundary. The postcentral gyrus comprises the primary somatosensory cortex which is concerned with somatosensory reception, integration and processing sensory information from the surface of the body and from the viscera, and is important for the formulation of perception. Caudal to the postcentral gyrus is the inferior parietal gyrus. The intraparietal sulcus separates the posterior parietal gyrus from the inferior parietal gyrus. The inferior parietal gyrus represents the cortical association area which integrates and processes sensory information from multiple modalities such as auditory and visual information. The inferior parietal gyrus, which is known as Wernicke's area, is also important for language and reading skills, whereas the superior parietal gyrus is concerned with body image and spatial orientations.
The temporal lobe is formed by three obliquely oriented gyri: the superior, middle, and inferior temporal gyri (Figure 1.9A). Inferomedial to the inferior temporal gyrus are the occipitotemporal and the parahippocampal gyri, which are separated by the collateral sulcus. The upper surface of the superior temporal gyrus, which extends into the lateral fissure, is called the transverse temporal gyrus (of Heschl) and is the primary auditory cortex. The caudal part of the superior temporal gyrus, which extends up to the parietal cortex, forms part of Wernicke’s area. Wernicke’s area is concerned, in part, with processing the auditory information and is important in the comprehension of language. The inferior part of the temporal lobe (i.e., the occipitotemporal gyri) is involved in visual and cognitive processing. More medially is the parahippocampal gyrus, which is involved in learning and memory. Portions of the frontal, parietal, and temporal lobes, which are adjacent to the lateral sulcus and overlie the insular cortex, are known as the operculum. The inferomedial surface of the temporal lobe is made up of the uncus and the parahippocampal gyrus medially. The inferior surface of the temporal lobe rests on the tentorium cerebelli.
The occipital lobe is the most caudal part of the brain, lies on the tentorium cerebelli (Figure 1.9A) and is comprised of several irregular lateral gyri. On its medial surface, there is a prominent fissure – the calcarine fissure and parieto-occipital sulcus. The calcarine fissure (sulcus) and the parieto-occipital sulcus also define a cortical region known as the cuneus. The cuneus sulcus divides the occipital lobe into the cuneus dorsally and ventrally into the lingual gyrus. The occipital lobe contains the primary and higher-order visual cortex.
The insula lobe is located deep inside the lateral fissure and can be seen only when the temporal and the frontal lobes are separated (Figures 1.8B and 1.8D). The insula is characterized by several long gyri and sulci, the gyri breves and gyri longi. There is some evidence that the insular cortical areas are involved in nociception and regulation of autonomic function.
The limbic lobe is not a true lobe and is comprised of several cortical regions such as the cingulate and parahippocampal gyri, some subcortical areas like the hippocampus, amygdala, septum, and other areas with their respective ascending and descending connections (Figures 1.8C and 1.9B). The limbic lobe is involved in memory and learning, drive related behavior, and emotional function.
There are subcortical areas in the telencephalon like the basal ganglia and the amygdaloid nucleus complex. The corpus callosum is a collection of nerve fibers that connect the two hemispheres. The corpus callosum is divided into rostrum (head), body, the most rostrally part is the genu (knee) with connecting the rostrum and the body, and the splenium at the caudal extremity (Figure 1.10). The corpus callosum plays an important role in transferring information from one hemisphere to the other.
There are subcortical areas in the telencephalon like the basal ganglia and the amygdaloid nucleus complex. The corpus callosum is a collection of nerve fibers that connect the two hemispheres. The corpus callosum is divided into rostrum (head), body, the most rostrally part is the genu (knee) with connecting the rostrum and the body, and the splenium at the caudal extremity (Figure 1.10). The corpus callosum plays an important role in transferring information from one hemisphere to the other.
The brain stem consists of mesencephalon (midbrain), metencephalon, and myelencephalon. The metencephalon and myelencephalon together compose the rhombencephalon (hindbrain), which divides into pons, and medulla oblongata (Figures 1.11 and 1.12).
Mesencephalon (midbrain) is continuous with the diencephalon rostrally and with the pons caudally. The midbrain is the smallest part of the brain stem, being about 2 cm in length. It consists of a tectum posteriorly, a tegmentum inferiorly, and a base anteriorly. The tectum forms the roof of the cerebral aqueduct, which connects the third ventricle with the fourth ventricle and the tegmentum its floor. The base of the midbrain consists of the cerebral peduncle, which contain nerve fibers descending from the cerebral cortex. The nuclei of the 3rd (oculomotor), the 4th (trochlear) and part of the 5th (trigeminal) are located in the midbrain tegmentum. The red nucleus and the substantia nigra, two prominent nuclei, are also found in the midbrain tegmentum. The midbrain tectum is formed by two pairs of rounded structures: the superior and inferior colliculi. The superior and inferior colliculi (Figure 1.12) are involved in visual and auditory functions respectively.
Pons is continuous with the midbrain and is composed of two parts, the pontine tegmentum (located internally) and the basilar pons. At the level of the pons, the cerebral aqueduct has expanded to form the fourth ventricle (Figure 1.12). The cerebellum is situated posterior to the pons and forms part of the roof (tectum) of the forth ventricle. The pons contains nuclei that receive axons from various cortical areas. Projections from the axons of these pontine neurons form large transverse fiber bundles that traverse the pons and ascend to the contralateral cerebellum via the middle cerebellar peduncles. Also, within the pons base and tegmentum are longitudinally ascending and descending fibers. The nuclei of the 5th (trigeminal), 6th (abducens), 7th (facial) and the 8th (vestibulocochlear) nerves are located in the pons tegmentum.
Medulla Oblongata (myelencephalon is also known as the medulla). The medulla lies between the pons rostrally and the spinal cord caudally. It is continuous with the spinal cord just above to foramen magnum and the first spinal nerve. The posterior surface of the medulla forms the caudal half of the fourth ventricle floor and the cerebellum, its roof (Figure 1.12). The base of the medulla is formed by the pyramidal-descending fibers from the cerebral cortex. The medulla tegmentum contains ascending and descending fibers and nuclei from the 9th (glossopharyngeal), 10th (vagus), 11th (accessory) and the 12th (hypoglossal) nerves. The corticospinal fibers (pyramid) are alongside the anterior median fissure, and decussate (cross the midline) to the contralateral side on their way to the spinal cord. Other prominent structures in the medulla are the inferior olive, and the inferior cerebellar peduncle. The medulla contains nuclei which regulate respiration, swallowing, sweating, gastric secretion, cardiac, and vasomotor activity.
Medulla Oblongata (myelencephalon is also known as the medulla). The medulla lies between the pons rostrally and the spinal cord caudally. It is continuous with the spinal cord just above to foramen magnum and the first spinal nerve. The posterior surface of the medulla forms the caudal half of the fourth ventricle floor and the cerebellum, its roof (Figure 1.12). The base of the medulla is formed by the pyramidal-descending fibers from the cerebral cortex. The medulla tegmentum contains ascending and descending fibers and nuclei from the 9th (glossopharyngeal), 10th (vagus), 11th (accessory) and the 12th (hypoglossal) nerves. The corticospinal fibers (pyramid) are alongside the anterior median fissure, and decussate (cross the midline) to the contralateral side on their way to the spinal cord. Other prominent structures in the medulla are the inferior olive, and the inferior cerebellar peduncle. The medulla contains nuclei which regulate respiration, swallowing, sweating, gastric secretion, cardiac, and vasomotor activity.
The arterial blood supply to the spinal cord is derived from two branches of vertebral artery, the anterior and two posterior spinal arteries which run the length of the spinal cord and form an irregular plexus around it (Figure 1.14).
The PNS includes 31 pairs of spinal nerves, 12 pairs of cranial nerves, the autonomic nervous system and the ganglia (groups of nerve cells outside the CNS) associated with them. Also included in the PNS are the sensory receptor organs. The receptor organs are scattered in all parts of the body, sense and perceive changes from external and internal organs, then transform this information to electrical signals, which are carried via an extensive nervous network to the CNS (Figure 1.15). The cranial and spinal nerves contain nerve fibers that conduct information to-afferent-(Latin for carry toward) and from-efferent (Latin for carry away) the CNS. Afferent fibers convey sensory information from sensory receptors in the skin, mucous membranes, and internal organs and from the eye, ear, nose and mouth to the CNS; the efferent fibers convey signals from cortical and subcortical centers to the spinal cord and from there to the muscle or autonomic ganglia that innervate the visceral organs. The afferent (sensory) fibers enter the spinal cord via the dorsal (posterior) root, and the efferent (motor) fibers exit the spinal cord via the ventral (anterior) root. The spinal nerve is formed by the joining of the dorsal and the ventral roots. The cranial nerves leave the skull and the spinal cord nerves leave the vertebrae through openings in the bone called foramina (Latin for opening).
The PNS is divided into two systems: the visceral system and the somatic system. The visceral system is also known as the autonomic system. The autonomic nervous system (ANS) is often considered a separate entity; although composed partially in the PNS and partially in the CNS, it interfaces between the PNS and the CNS. The primary function of the ANS is to regulate and control unconsciousness functions including visceral, smooth muscle, cardiac muscle, vessels, and glandular function (Figure 1.16). The ANS can be divided into three subdivisions:
The sympathetic (or the thoracolumbar) subdivision associated with neurons located in the spinal gray between the thoracic and the upper lumbar levels;
The parasympathetic (or craniosacral) subdivision is associated with the 3rd, 7th, 9th and the 10th cranial nerves as well as with the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th sacral nerves;
The enteric subdivision is a complex neuronal network within the walls of the gastrointestinal system and contains more neurons than the spinal cord. The visceral (autonomic) system regulates the internal organs outside the realm of conscious control. The PNS component of the somatic system includes the sensory receptors and the neurons innervating them and their nerve fibers entering the spinal cord. The visceral and the somatic nervous system are primarily concerned with their own functions, but also work in harmony with other aspects of the nervous system.
This section illustrates representative sections through the CNS in order to acquaint the reader with prominent structures and help in the recognition of the level and orientation of the section. It also provides landmarks for locating nuclei and tracts involved in sensory and motor functions. Directional terms are used in describing the locations of structures in the CNS.
Keep in mind that certain terms were developed to describe the nervous system of quadrupeds and may have a slightly different meaning when applied to bipeds. For example, the ventral surface of the quadruped spinal cord is comparable to the anterior surface of the biped (Figure 1.18). In the following descriptions, the terms are applied to a standing human. The terms rostral and anterior refer to a direction towards the face/nose. The terms caudal and posterior refer to a direction towards the buttocks/tail. The terms inferior and superior generally refer to spatial relationships in a vertical direction (Figure 1.18). A coronal section is parallel to the vertical plane and a midcoronal section would divide the head into anterior and posterior halves (Figure 1.19). The sagittal section is also parallel to the vertical plane, but a midsagittal section would divide the head into right and left halves. The horizontal (axial) section is parallel to the horizontal plane and a mid-horizontal section would divide the head into superior and inferior halves. Transverse or cross sections of the spinal cord of humans are taken in a plane perpendicular to the vertical (i.e., in the horizontal plane of the head). Most electromagnetic imaging techniques produce images of the brain in the coronal, horizontal (axial) and sagittal planes. The representative sections are transverse sections through the spinal cord and brain stem and coronal sections through the telencephalon and diencephalon (Figure 1.17).
Transverse Section through the Spinal Cord. Figure 1.17A illustrates a section taken at the level of the thoracic spinal cord. The spinal cord neuron (gray matter) form a central core taking a butterfly configuration that is surrounded by nerve fibers (white matter). In the left and right halves of the spinal cord, the gray matter is organized into a dorsal horn and ventral horn with the intermediate gray located between them. In the thoracic spinal cord, which is illustrated in this figure, a lateral horn extends laterally from the intermediate gray (Figure 1.17A). The spinal cord white matter is subdivided into the posterior white column, the anterior white column and the lateral white column. The anterior white commissure joins the two halves of the spinal cord and is located ventral to the intermediate gray. The dorsal root fibers enter the spinal cord at the dorsolateral sulcus and the fibers of the ventral root fibers exit the spinal cord in numerous fine bundles through the ventral funiculus (see Figure 1.5).
Transverse Section through the Medulla. Figure 1.17B is a section taken at the level of the upper medulla. Landmark structures include the fourth ventricle, hypoglossal nucleus, inferior cerebellar peduncle, inferior olivary complex and the pyramids. As in the spinal cord section, the fiber tracts, the inferior cerebellar peduncle and pyramids, appear light in this section whereas the nuclei in the inferior olivary complex appear dark.
Transverse Section through the Pons. Figure 1.17C is a section taken at the level of the mid pons. Landmark structures include the fourth ventricle, the pons tegmentum, which includes the abducens nuclei; the pons base, which includes the corticofugal fibers and pontine nuclei; and the middle cerebellar peduncles.
Coronal Section through the Rostral Telencephalon. Figure 1.17D is a section taken at the level of the decussation of the anterior commissure. Landmark structures include the head of the caudate nucleus, the anterior limb of the internal capsule, the globus pallidus and putamen (important for controlling motor functions). The anterior commissure, a fiber bundle connecting the right and left frontal lobes, can be seen decussating (crossing the midline). The corpus callosum forms a thick band of decussating nerve fibers located above the lateral ventricles. Below the telencephalon afferent nerve fibers from each eye decussate in the optic chiasm and join uncrossed fibers to form the optic tract.
Coronal Section through the Midbrain-Diencephalon Junction. Figure 1.17E is a section taken at the level of the junction of the midbrain with the diencephalon. Notice that the plane of section differs from those of the previous sections. At this level, a landmark structure of the diencephalon is the thalamus, which surrounds the third ventricle. The posterior limb of the internal capsule separates the thalamus from the surrounding telencephalic structures (i.e., the globus pallidus and putamen). Lateral to the putamen is the insula while more dorsomedially the corpus callosum overlies the cavities of the lateral ventricles. Below the third ventricle are the red nucleus, substantia nigra and crus cerebri of the midbrain, which are the continuation of the internal capsule.
Section through the Midbrain. Figure 1.17F is a section that shows the main midbrain nuclei which include the tectum (superior colliculi) the periaqueductal gray, the red nuclei, substantia nigra and the cerebral peduncles.
The somatosensory systems inform us about objects in our external environment through touch (i.e., physical contact with skin) and about the position and movement of our body parts (proprioception) through the stimulation of muscle and joints. The somatosensory systems also monitor the temperature of the body, external objects and environment, and provide information about painful, itchy and tickling stimuli. The sensory information processed by the somatosensory systems travels along different anatomical pathways depending on the information carried. For example, the posterior column-medial lemniscal pathway carries discriminative touch and proprioceptive information from the body, and the main sensory trigeminal pathway carries this information from the face. Whereas, the spinothalamic pathways carry crude touch, pain and temperature information from the body, and the spinal trigeminal pathway carries this information from the face. 
This first series of chapters on somatosensory systems concentrates on the somatosensory systems that provide accurate information about the location and temporal features of stimuli and about sharp pain, tactile stimuli and the position and movement of body parts. This chapter describes somatosensory stimuli, the sensations produced when they are applied, and the cutaneous, muscle, and joint receptors that are responsible for initiating the perceived somatic sensations. Subsequent chapters describe the pathways processing other pain, temperature, crude touch and visceral sensations.
Modality Specificity in the Somatosensory System. The somatosensory systems process information about, and represent, several modalities of somatic sensation (i.e., pain, temperature, touch, proprioception). Each of these modalities can be divided into sub-modalities, as shown in Table 1 (e.g., pain into sharp, pricking, cutting pain; dull, burning pain; and deep aching pain). Discriminative touch is also subdivided into touch, pressure, flutter and vibration. Each of these sensations (i.e., sub-modalities) is represented by neurons that exhibit modality specificity. That is, when a somatosensory neuron is stimulated naturally (e.g., by skin warming) or artificially (e.g., by electrical stimulation of the neuron), the sensation perceived is specific to the information normally processed by the neuron (i.e., warm skin). Consequently, a "warm" somatosensory neuron will not respond to cooling of the skin or to a touch stimulus that does not "warm" the skin. The somatosensory receptor and its central connections determine the modality specificity of the neurons forming a somatosensory pathway.
Tactile Stimuli. Tactile stimuli are external forces in physical contact with the skin that give rise to the sensations of touch, pressure, flutter, or vibration. We normally think of touch as involving minimal force on-or-by an object that produces very little distortion of the skin. In contrast, pressure involves a greater force that displaces the skin and underlying tissue. Time varying tactile stimuli produce more complex sensations such as object movement or object flutter (20 to 50 Hz) or vibration (100 to 300 Hz). An initial clinical examination of discriminative touch often involves testing the vibratory sense by applying a 128 Hz tuning fork over a bony prominence.
Proprioceptive Stimuli.1 Proprioceptive stimuli are internal forces that are generated by the position or movement of a body part. Static forces on the joints, muscles and tendons, which maintain limb position against the force of gravity, indicate the position of a limb. The movement of a limb is indicated by dynamic changes in the forces applied to muscles, tendons and joints. An initial clinical examination of proprioception often involves testing the position sense by having the patient, with eyes closed, touch one finger with another after the target finger has been moved. 
Proprioception is critical for maintaining posture and balance. Somatosensory proprioceptive cues are combined with vestibular proprioceptive cues and visual cues to control motor responses to changes in body/head position. During a clinical examination, the Romberg test requires the patient to maintain balance while standing with feet together and eyes closed. It tests whether the proprioceptive components are working properly when the visual cues are missing and proprioceptive cues are the major sources of information. 
Sharp Cutting Pain Stimuli. Painful (nociceptive) stimuli are tissue-damaging sources of energy that may be external or internal to the body surface. Sharp, cutting pain is the sensation elicited on initial contact with the painful stimulus. The sensation of dull, burning pain may follow as a consequence of tissue inflammation. An initial clinical examination of the pain sense often involves testing sharp, cutting pain sensitivity by asking the patient, who has her/his eyes closed, what they feel when pricked with a pin. Pain mechanisms and pathways are described in detail in later chapters.
Peripheral Somatosensory Neurons. The cell bodies of the first-order (1°) somatosensory afferent neurons2 are located in posterior root or cranial root ganglia (i.e., are part of the peripheral nervous system, Figure 2.1). The 1° afferents are pseudounipolar cells. The cell body gives rise to a single process that divides to form a peripheral axon and a central axon. The peripheral axon travels to and ends in the skin, muscle, tendon or joint and the central axon travels to and ends in the central nervous system.
Somatosensory Receptor Organ. The receptors of most sensory systems are located in specialized sensory receptor organs (e.g., the photoreceptors in the eye and the auditory and vestibular hair cells in the inner ear) or within a restricted part of the body (e.g., the taste buds in the mouth and the olfactory receptors in the olfactory mucosa of the nose). For the tactile component of the somatosensory system, the skin covering the entire body, head and face functions as the touch receptor organ, whereas joint tissues, muscles and tendons act as the proprioception receptor organs. These sensory receptor organs "house" the somatosensory receptors and deliver the somatosensory stimuli to the receptors.
Sensory Receptors. Specialized sensory receptor cells (e.g., the photoreceptors of the eye) are located in specialized receptor organs, produce receptor potentials, contain synaptic specializations, and release neural transmitters (Figure 2.2). Specialized sensory receptors may be modified neurons (e.g., the photoreceptors and olfactory receptors) or modified epithelial cells (e.g., taste receptors and the auditory and vestibular hair cells).
There is only one type of sensory receptor cell in the somatosensory system, the Merkel cells, and they are found only in skin. The vast majority of somatosensory receptors are not specialized receptor cells. That is, they are formed by the endings of the somatosensory 1° afferent peripheral axon and adjacent tissue (Figure 2.3). There is no synaptic specialization or neurotransmitter within the adjacent tissue. The adjacent tissue also does not generate receptor potentials.
Instead of ending on specialized receptors, most peripheral axons of somatosensory 1° afferents travel to skin, muscle or joint, branch near their terminal sites, and end in the skin (Figure 2.4), muscle, tendon or joint tissue.
All the peripheral terminal branches of a 1° somatosensory axon end in a specific type of tissue (e.g., skin) and not in multiple types of tissue (i.e., not in skin and muscle). All the peripheral terminal branches of a 1° axon form only one type of somatosensory receptor.
Many of the 1° somatosensory afferent terminals are enveloped in a connective tissue capsule along with surrounding muscle, tendon or cutaneous cells, or end on hair follicles. The hair follicles and the encapsulated tissue adjacent to the 1° afferent terminals (i.e., skin, muscle, tendon, and joint tissues) contain no synaptic specializations and do not generate receptor potentials or release neural transmitters. The complex of encapsulated tissue and afferent endings and the complex of hair follicle and afferent endings play a role in the receptor transduction process, and each complex is considered to form a "somatosensory receptor". Many other 1° somatosensory axons branch and terminate in skin, muscle, or joint as free nerve endings. These endings are bare of myelin, are not encapsulated and are not associated with a specific type of tissue.
The sensitivity of the receptors to specific stimuli (e.g., touch verses muscle stretch) is determined by the location of the receptor and by the non-neural tissue surrounding the 1° afferent terminal (Figure 2.6).
The Adequate Stimulus. The adequate somatosensory stimulus (i.e., the stimulus to which a somatosensory neuron is most sensitive) is either a mechanical force, a temperature change, tissue damage, or a chemical action. The discriminative touch and proprioceptive systems are most sensitive to mechanical force. Consequently, their sensory receptors are of the mechanoreceptor category.
Sensory Transduction. The non-neural tissue surrounding the peripheral ending of the somatosensory 1° afferent helps concentrate and deliver the stimulus (e.g., mechanical force) onto the 1° afferent terminal membrane. Somatosensory mechanoreceptors function to transduce the applied mechanical force into an electrical potential change in the 1° afferent neuron.
The mechanoreceptor 1° afferent terminal membrane contains ion channels that respond to mechanical distortion by increasing sodium and potassium conductance (i.e., the channels are stress gated). Generator potentials are produced as sodium and potassium flow down their electrochemical gradients to depolarize the terminal ending (see Figure 2.3B). In most cases, the magnitude and duration of the generator potentials are related to the applied mechanical force: the greater the mechanical force, the greater is the depolarization, and the longer the mechanical force is applied, the longer the terminal remains depolarized (Figure 2.7). Terminals that do not sustain the depolarization for the duration of the mechanical distortion are called rapidly adapting. Terminals that sustain the depolarization with minimal decrease in amplitude for the duration of a stimulus are called slowly adapting.
The generator potential spreads passively along the 1° terminal fiber to the axon trigger zone - that part of the 1° afferent axon containing voltage-sensitive sodium and potassium channels (see Figure 2.3B). If the depolarization reaches threshold at these voltage-sensitive sites, action potentials are generated by the 1° afferent peripheral axon. When the action potentials reach the central terminals of the 1° afferent, they initiate the release neurotransmitters on 2° afferents within spinal cord or brain stem nuclei. If, as in the example in Figure 2.8, the generator potential is slowly adapting, the 1° afferent produces a sustained discharge of action potentials that continue for the duration of the stimulus.
If the generator potential is rapidly adapting (Figure 2.9), the 1° afferent produces a transient, short burst of action potentials and falls silent even in the continued presence of the stimulus.
The rapidly adapting receptors produce generator potentials and action potential discharges that follow the time-varying waveform of pressure changes produced by a vibrating stimulus (Figure 2.10, left panel). In contrast, the slowing adapting receptors produce generator potentials and action potential discharges that are sustained and unable to mimic the time-varying pattern of the stimulus (Figure 2.10, right panel). Consequently, the responses of rapidly adapting 1° afferents are best suited for representing time varying (e.g., vibrating or moving) stimuli, whereas slowly adapting 1° afferents better represent static stimuli (e.g., sustained pressure).
Some of the somatosensory receptors in skin (i.e., the cutaneous receptors) are classified as encapsulated receptors as the 1° afferent terminal and surrounding cutaneous tissue are encapsulated by a thin sheath (Table II). The encapsulated cutaneous receptors include Meissner corpuscles, Pacinian corpuscles and Ruffini corpuscles (See Figure 2.11). Other cutaneous receptors are unencapsulated and include the hair follicle receptor (the 1° afferent ends on hair follicles) and the Merkel complex (the 1° afferent ends at the base of a specialized receptor cell called the Merkel cell). The sensory receptors of the crude touch, pain and temperature senses are bare or free nerve endings. That is, they are unencapsulated, do not end on or near specialized tissue, and may be mechanoreceptors, nociceptors or thermoreceptors.
As was noted earlier, the sensitivity (modality specificity) of the somatosensory receptor is determined by its location and by the structure of the non-neural tissue surrounding the 1° afferent terminal. The following describes the most commonly observed cutaneous receptors.
Meissner Corpuscle. The Meissner corpuscle is found in glabrous (i.e., hairless) skin, within the dermal papillae (Figure 2.11). It consists of an elongated, encapsulated stack of flattened epithelial (laminar) cells with 1° afferent terminal fibers interdigitated between the cells (Figure 2.12).
A force applied to non-hairy skin (Figure 2.13) causes the laminar cells in the Meissner corpuscle to slide past one another, which distorts the membranes of the axon terminals located between these cells. If the force is maintained, the laminar cells remain in a fixed, albeit, displaced position, and the shearing force on the axon terminals' membranes disappears. Consequently, the 1° afferent axons produce a transient, rapidly adapting response to a sustained mechanical stimulus.
The Meissner 1° afferent discharges "follow" low frequency vibrating (30 -50 Hz) stimuli, which produces the sensation of "flutter" (Figure 2.10, left panel). Because a single 1° afferent axon forms many, dispersed (3-4 mm) Meissner corpuscles, the 1° afferent can detect and signal small movements across the skin. Stimulation of a sequence of Meissner corpuscles have been described to produce the perception of localized movement along the skin.
Consequently, Meissner corpuscles are considered to be the discriminative touch system's flutter and movement detecting receptors in non-hairy skin.
Pacinian Corpuscle. Pacinian corpuscles are found in subcutaneous tissue beneath the dermis (Figure 2.9) and in the connective tissues of bone, the body wall and body cavity. Therefore, they can be cutaneous, proprioceptive or visceral receptors, depending on their location.
The Pacinian corpuscle is football-shaped, encapsulated, and contains concentrically layered epithelial (laminar) cells (Figure 2.14). In cross section, the Pacinian corpuscle looks like a slice of onion, with a single 1° afferent terminal fiber located in its center. The outer layers of laminar cells contain fluid that is displaced when a force is applied on the corpuscle.
When a force is first applied on the Pacinian corpuscle (Figure 2.15), it initially displaces the laminar cells and distorts the axon terminal membrane. If the external pressure is maintained on the corpuscle, the displacement of fluid in the outer laminar cells dissipates the applied force on the axon terminal. Consequently, a sustained force on the corpuscle is transformed into a transient force on the axon terminal, and the Pacinian corpuscle 1° afferent produces a fast adapting response.
Pacinian corpuscles 1° afferent axons are most sensitive to vibrating stimuli (e.g., a tuning fork vibrating at 100 to 300 Hz, Figure 2.10, left) and unresponsive to steady pressure. The sensation elicited when cutaneous Pacinian corpuscles are stimulated is of vibration or tickle.
Pacinian corpuscles in skin are considered to be the vibration sensitive receptors of the discriminative touch system.
Ruffini Corpuscle. The Ruffini corpuscles are found deep in the skin (Figure 2.11), as well as in joint ligaments and joint capsules and can function as cutaneous or proprioceptive receptors depending on their location. The Ruffini corpuscle (Figure 2.16) is cigar-shaped, encapsulated, and contains longitudinal strands of collagenous fibers that are continuous with the connective tissue of the skin or joint. Within the capsule, the 1° afferent fiber branches repeatedly and its branches are intertwined with the encapsulated collagenous fibers.
The Ruffini corpuscles are oriented with their long axes parallel to the surface of the skin and are most sensitive to skin stretch. Stretching the skin (Figure 2.17) stretches the collagen fibers within the Ruffini corpuscle, which compresses the axon terminals. As the collagen fibers remain stretched and the axon terminals remain compressed during the skin stretch, the Ruffini corpuscle's 1° afferent axon produces a sustained slowly adapting discharge to maintained stimuli.
Ruffini corpuscles in skin are considered to be skin stretch sensitive receptors of the discriminative touch system. They also work with the proprioceptors in joints and muscles to indicate the position and movement of body parts.
Hair Follicle. The hair follicle receptor is an unencapsulated cutaneous receptor (Figure 2.10). The 1° afferent terminal axons spiral around the hair follicle base or run parallel to the hair shaft forming a lattice-like pattern (Figure 2.18).
Most hair follicle 1° afferents are the fast-adapting type; displacement of the hair produces a transient discharge of action potentials at the onset of the displacement and a maintained displacement of the hair often fails to produce a sustained discharge (Figure 2.19). The hair follicle afferents respond best to moving objects and signal the direction and velocity of the movement of a stimulus brushing against hairy skin.
As Meissner corpuscles are absent from hairy skin, the hair follicle endings are considered to be the discriminative touch system's movement sensitive receptors in hairy skin.
Merkel Complex. The Merkel complex is found in both hairy and non-hairy skin and is located in the basal layer of the epidermis (Figure 2.11). The Merkel complex is unencapsulated and consists of a specialized receptor cell, the Merkel cell, and a 1° afferent terminal ending, the Merkel disk3 (Figure 2.20). Thick, short, finger-like protrusions of the Merkel cell couple it tightly to the surrounding tissue. The Merkel cell is a modified epithelial cell, which contains synaptic vesicles that appear to release neuropeptides that modulate the activity of the 1° afferent terminal. Each 1° afferent axon often innervates only a few Merkel cells in a discrete patch of skin (Figure 2.18).
A force applied to the skin overlying the Merkel cell distorts it (Figure 2.21), which stimulates its release of a neuropeptide at its synaptic junctions with the Merkel disk. As the Merkel cell is mechanically coupled to the surrounding skin, it remains distorted for the duration of the force applied on the overlying skin. Consequently, the Merkel complex 1° afferent axon responds to small forces applied to a discrete patch of skin with a slowly adapting, sustained discharge.
Merkel cells are considered to be the fine tactile receptors of the discriminative touch system that provide cues used to localize tactile stimuli and to perceive the edges (shape or form) of objects.
Free Nerve Endings. Free nerve endings are found throughout the body, in skin (Figure 2.11), muscles, tendons, joints, mucous membranes, cornea, body mesentery, the dura, the viscera, etc. The free nerve endings in skin are stimulated by tissue-damaging (nociceptive) stimuli that produce the sensation of pain or by cooling of the skin or the warming of skin or by touch. Notice that although all cutaneous free nerve endings appear very similar morphologically, there are different functional types of free nerve endings, with each responding to specific types of cutaneous stimuli (e.g., nociceptive, cooling, warming or touch).
Free nerve endings are considered to be the somatosensory receptors for pain, temperature and crude touch.
Proprioceptors are located in muscles, tendons, joint ligaments and in joint capsules. There are no specialized sensory receptor cells for body proprioception4. In skeletal (striated) muscle, there are two types of encapsulated proprioceptors, muscle spindles and Golgi tendon organs (Figure 2.22), as well as numerous free nerve endings. Within the joints, there are encapsulated endings similar to those in skin, as well as numerous free nerve endings.
Muscle Spindles. Muscle spindles are found in nearly all striated muscles. A muscle spindle is encapsulated and consists of small muscle fibers, called intrafusal muscle fibers, and afferent and efferent nerve terminals (Figure 2.23).
Intrafusal muscles are found exclusively in muscle spindle receptors and are distributed throughout the body among the ordinary extrafusal muscle fibers of skeletal muscles. The intrafusal fibers are attached to the larger, surrounding extrafusal muscle fibers. They are oriented in parallel with the extrafusal fibers but do not contribute directly to muscle strength when they contract because of their small size. 
There are two types of afferent terminals in the muscle spindle (Figure 2.23). The annulospiral endings wrap around the central region of the intrafusal fibers, whereas the flower-spray endings terminate predominantly in more polar regions (away from the central area) of the intrafusal fibers. The 1° afferents forming the annulospiral endings are called the primary muscle spindle afferents, whereas those forming the flower-spray endings are called the secondary muscle spindle afferents.
In addition to afferent terminals, the terminals (motor endplates) of gamma motor neurons end on intrafusal muscle fibers. They will be described in detail in the chapters covering motor systems.
In summary, the muscle spindles are proprioceptors specialized to monitor muscle length (stretch) and signal the rate of change in muscle length by changing the discharge rate of afferent action potentials. Muscle spindles are most numerous in muscles that carry out fine movements, such as the extraocular muscles and the intrinsic muscles of the hand. There are fewer spindles in large muscles that control gross movements of the body (e.g., the muscles of the back). 
Golgi Tendon Organs. Golgi tendon organs are found in the tendons of striated extrafusal muscles near the muscle-tendon junction (Figure 2.22). Golgi tendon organs resemble Ruffini corpuscles. For example, they are encapsulated and contain intertwining collagen bundles, which are continuous with the muscle tendon, and fine branches of afferent fibers that weave between the collagen bundles (Figure 2.24). They are functionally "in series" with striated muscle.
The Golgi tendon organ collagen fibers are continuous with the extrafusal muscle at one end and with the muscle tendon at its opposite end. Consequently, the mechanical force on the organ is maximal when the extrafusal muscles contract, shorten, and increase the tension on the tendon. When the muscles contract, the 1° afferent terminals are compressed and remain compressed as long as the muscle remains contracted. The Golgi tendon organ 1° afferent response to sustained isometric muscle contraction is slowly adapting, and the 1° afferent generates action potentials as long as the tension is maintained. The responses of the Golgi tendon organ 1° afferent axon is maximal when the contracted muscle bears a load, e.g., when lifting a heavy object.
The Golgi tendon organ is a proprioceptor that monitors and signals muscle contraction against a force (muscle tension), whereas the muscle spindle is a proprioceptor that monitors and signals muscle stretch (muscle length). 
Joint Receptors. Joint receptors are found within the connective tissue, capsule and ligaments of joints (Figure 2.25). The encapsulated endings resemble the Ruffini and Pacinian corpuscles and the Golgi tendon organs.
The joint 1° afferents respond to changes in the angle, direction, and velocity of movement in a joint. The responses are predominantly rapidly adapting with few joint 1° afferents signaling the resting (static) position of the joint. It has been suggested that information from muscles, tendons, skin and joints are combined to provide estimates of joint position and movement. For example, when the hip joint is replaced — removing all joint receptors — the ability to detect the position of the thigh relative to the pelvis is not lost. 
Free Nerve Endings. As mentioned above, free nerve endings of 1° afferents are abundant in muscles, tendons, joints, and ligaments. These free nerve endings are considered to be the somatosensory receptors for pain resulting from muscle, tendon, joint, or ligament damage and are not considered to be part of the proprioceptive system.
In this chapter, you have learned about somatosensory stimuli and the receptors of three components of the somatosensory systems. These three components provide accurate information about the location, shape, texture, and movement of tactile stimuli, (discriminative touch), the position and movement of body parts (proprioception) and the application and location of painful stimuli (nociception). Tactile and proprioceptive stimuli are the mechanical forces produced when skin contacts external objects (discriminative touch), limbs oppose the force of gravity (body position) and muscles contract and body parts move. Painful stimuli are tissue-damaging forces. The sensations produced are those of touch, pressure, flutter, and vibration/movement (discriminative touch), body position and movement (proprioception), and sharp cutting pain. The discriminative touch receptors are encapsulated 1° afferent terminals (Meissner, Pacinian and Ruffini corpuscles), hair follicle endings and Merkel complexes in skin. The proprioceptive receptors in muscle are also encapsulated and include the muscle spindle and Golgi tendon organ. The joint receptors are similar to the encapsulated endings in skin and tendon and are found in the joint capsule and ligaments. The sharp cutting nociceptors are free nerve endings. 
Although it is convenient to subdivide somatosensory receptors and pathways for didactic, clinical and research purposes, it is important to keep in mind that most somatosensory stimuli act simultaneously and in varying degrees on all somatosensory receptors in the body part stimulated. For example, placing a heavy, cold object in an outstretched hand produces tactile, thermal, and proprioceptive sensations that allow us to appreciate the presence (touch, pressure), temperature, and weight of the object and provide proprioceptive information for finger, wrist and arm adjustments so we do not drop the object.
The spinal cord is the most important structure between the body and the brain. The spinal cord extends from the foramen magnum where it is continuous with the medulla to the level of the first or second lumbar vertebrae. It is a vital link between the brain and the body, and from the body to the brain. The spinal cord is 40 to 50 cm long and 1 cm to 1.5 cm in diameter. Two consecutive rows of nerve roots emerge on each of its sides. These nerve roots join distally to form 31 pairs of spinal nerves. The spinal cord is a cylindrical structure of nervous tissue composed of white and gray matter, is uniformly organized and is divided into four regions: cervical (C), thoracic (T), lumbar (L) and sacral (S), (Figure 3.1), each of which is comprised of several segments. The spinal nerve contains motor and sensory nerve fibers to and from all parts of the body. Each spinal cord segment innervates a dermatome (see below and Figure 3.5).
Although the spinal cord constitutes only about 2% of the central nervous system (CNS), its functions are vital. Knowledge of spinal cord functional anatomy makes it possible to diagnose the nature and location of cord damage and many cord diseases.
Although the spinal cord constitutes only about 2% of the central nervous system (CNS), its functions are vital. Knowledge of spinal cord functional anatomy makes it possible to diagnose the nature and location of cord damage and many cord diseases.
The cord is segmentally organized. There are 31 segments, defined by 31 pairs of nerves exiting the cord. These nerves are divided into 8 cervical, 12 thoracic, 5 lumbar, 5 sacral, and 1 coccygeal nerve (Figure 3.2). Dorsal and ventral roots enter and leave the vertebral column respectively through intervertebral foramen at the vertebral segments corresponding to the spinal segment.
The cord is sheathed in the same three meninges as is the brain: the pia, arachnoid and dura. The dura is the tough outer sheath, the arachnoid lies beneath it, and the pia closely adheres to the surface of the cord (Figure 3.3). The spinal cord is attached to the dura by a series of lateral denticulate ligaments emanating from the pial folds.
During the initial third month of embryonic development, the spinal cord extends the entire length of the vertebral canal and both grow at about the same rate. As development continues, the body and the vertebral column continue to grow at a much greater rate than the spinal cord proper. This results in displacement of the lower parts of the spinal cord with relation to the vertebrae column. The outcome of this uneven growth is that the adult spinal cord extends to the level of the first or second lumbar vertebrae, and the nerves grow to exit through the same intervertebral foramina as they did during embryonic development. This growth of the nerve roots occurring within the vertebral canal, results in the lumbar, sacral, and coccygeal roots extending to their appropriate vertebral levels (Figure 3.2).

All spinal nerves, except the first, exit below their corresponding vertebrae. In the cervical segments, there are 7 cervical vertebrae and 8 cervical nerves (Figure 3.2). C1-C7 nerves exit above their vertebrae whereas the C8 nerve exits below the C7 vertebra. It leaves between the C7 vertebra and the first thoracic vertebra. Therefore, each subsequent nerve leaves the cord below the corresponding vertebra. In the thoracic and upper lumbar regions, the difference between the vertebrae and cord level is three segments. Therefore, the root filaments of spinal cord segments have to travel longer distances to reach the corresponding intervertebral foramen from which the spinal nerves emerge. The lumbosacral roots are known as the cauda equina (Figure 3.2).

Each spinal nerve is composed of nerve fibers that are related to the region of the muscles and skin that develops from one body somite (segment). A spinal segment is defined by dorsal roots entering and ventral roots exiting the cord, (i.e., a spinal cord section that gives rise to one spinal nerve is considered as a segment.) (Figure 3.4).
A dermatome is an area of skin supplied by peripheral nerve fibers originating from a single dorsal root ganglion. If a nerve is cut, one loses sensation from that dermatome. Because each segment of the cord innervates a different region of the body, dermatomes can be precisely mapped on the body surface, and loss of sensation in a dermatome can indicate the exact level of spinal cord damage in clinical assessment of injury (Figure 3.5). It is important to consider that there is some overlap between neighboring dermatomes. Because sensory information from the body is relayed to the CNS through the dorsal roots, the axons originating from dorsal root ganglion cells are classified as primary sensory afferents, and the dorsal root's neurons are the first order (1°) sensory neuron. Most axons in the ventral roots arise from motor neurons in the ventral horn of the spinal cord and innervate skeletal muscle. Others arise from the lateral horn and synapse on autonomic ganglia that innervate visceral organs. The ventral root axons join with the peripheral processes of the dorsal root ganglion cells to form mixed afferent and efferent spinal nerves, which merge to form peripheral nerves. Knowledge of the segmental innervation of the cutaneous area and the muscles is essential to diagnose the site of an injury.
A transverse section of the adult spinal cord shows white matter in the periphery, gray matter inside, and a tiny central canal filled with CSF at its center. Surrounding the canal is a single layer of cells, the ependymal layer. Surrounding the ependymal layer is the gray matter – a region containing cell bodies – shaped like the letter “H” or a “butterfly”. The two “wings” of the butterfly are connected across the midline by the dorsal gray commissure and below the white commissure (Figure 3.6). The shape and size of the gray matter varies according to spinal cord level. At the lower levels, the ratio between gray matter and white matter is greater than in higher levels, mainly because lower levels contain less ascending and descending nerve fibers. (Figure 3.1 and Figure 3.6).
The gray matter mainly contains the cell bodies of neurons and glia and is divided into four main columns: dorsal horn, intermediate column, lateral horn and ventral horn column. (Figure 3.6).

The dorsal horn is found at all spinal cord levels and is comprised of sensory nuclei that receive and process incoming somatosensory information. From there, ascending projections emerge to transmit the sensory information to the midbrain and diencephalon. The intermediate column and the lateral horn comprise autonomic neurons innervating visceral and pelvic organs. The ventral horn comprises motor neurons that innervate skeletal muscle.

At all the levels of the spinal cord, nerve cells in the gray substance are multipolar, varying much in their morphology. Many of them are Golgi type I and Golgi type II nerve cells. The axons of Golgi type I are long and pass out of the gray matter into the ventral spinal roots or the fiber tracts of the white matter. The axons and dendrites of the Golgi type II cells are largely confined to the neighboring neurons in the gray matter.

A more recent classification of neurons within the gray matter is based on function. These cells are located at all levels of the spinal cord and are grouped into three main categories: root cells, column or tract cells and propriospinal cells.

The root cells are situated in the ventral and lateral gray horns and vary greatly in size. The most prominent features of the root cells are large multipolar elements exceeding 25 µm of their somata. The root cells contribute their axons to the ventral roots of the spinal nerves and are grouped into two major divisions: 1) somatic efferent root neurons, which innervate the skeletal musculature; and 2) the visceral efferent root neurons, also called preganglionic autonomic axons, which send their axons to various autonomic ganglia.

The column or tract cells and their processes are located mainly in the dorsal gray horn and are confined entirely within the CNS. The axons of the column cells form longitudinal ascending tracts that ascend in the white columns and terminate upon neurons located rostrally in the brain stem, cerebellum or diencephalon. Some column cells send their axons up and down the cord to terminate in gray matter close to their origin and are known as intersegmental association column cells. Other column cell axons terminate within the segment in which they originate and are called intrasegmental association column cells. Still other column cells send their axons across the midline to terminate in gray matter close to their origin and are called commissure association column cells.

The propriospinal cells are spinal interneurons whose axons do not leave the spinal cord proper. Propriospinal cells account for about 90% of spinal neurons. Some of these fibers also are found around the margin of the gray matter of the cord and are collectively called the fasciculus proprius or the propriospinal or the archispinothalamic tract.

Spinal neurons are organized into nuclei and laminae.
The prominent nuclear groups of cell columns within the spinal cord from dorsal to ventral are the marginal zone, substantia gelatinosa, nucleus proprius, dorsal nucleus of Clarke, intermediolateral nucleus and the lower motor neuron nuclei.
Marginal zone nucleus or posterior marginalis, is found at all spinal cord levels as a thin layer of column/tract cells (column cells) that caps the tip of the dorsal horn. The axons of its neurons contribute to the lateral spinothalamic tract which relays pain and temperature information to the diencephalon (Figure 3.7).

Substantia gelatinosa is found at all levels of the spinal cord. Located in the dorsal cap-like portion of the head of the dorsal horn, it relays pain, temperature and mechanical (light touch) information and consists mainly of column cells (intersegmental column cells). These column cells synapse in cell at Rexed layers IV to VII, whose axons contribute to the ventral (anterior) and lateral spinal thalamic tracts. The homologous substantia gelatinosa in the medulla is the spinal trigeminal nucleus.

Nucleus proprius is located below the substantia gelatinosa in the head and neck of the dorsal horn. This cell group, sometimes called the chief sensory nucleus, is associated with mechanical and temperature sensations. It is a poorly defined cell column which extends through all segments of the spinal cord and its neurons contribute to ventral and lateral spinal thalamic tracts, as well as to spinal cerebellar tracts. The axons originating in nucleus proprius project to the thalamus via the spinothalamic tract and to the cerebellum via the ventral spinocerebellar tract (VSCT).

Dorsal nucleus of Clarke is a cell column located in the mid-portion of the base form of the dorsal horn. The axons from these cells pass uncrossed to the lateral funiculus and form the dorsal (posterior) spinocerebellar tract (DSCT), which subserve unconscious proprioception from muscle spindles and Golgi tendon organs to the cerebellum, and some of them innervate spinal interneurons. The dorsal nucleus of Clarke is found only in segments C8 to L3 of the spinal cord and is most prominent in lower thoracic and upper lumbar segments. The homologous dorsal nucleus of Clarke in the medulla is the accessory cuneate nucleus, which is the origin of the cuneocerebellar tract (CCT).

Intermediolateral nucleus is located in the intermediate zone between the dorsal and the ventral horns in the spinal cord levels. Extending from C8 to L3, it receives viscerosensory information and contains preganglionic sympathetic neurons, which form the lateral horn. A large proportion of its cells are root cells which send axons into the ventral spinal roots via the white rami to reach the sympathetic tract as preganglionic fibers. Similarly, cell columns in the intermediolateral nucleus located at the S2 to S4 levels contains preganglionic parasympathetic neurons (Figure 3.7).

Lower motor neuron nuclei are located in the ventral horn of the spinal cord. They contain predominantly motor nuclei consisting of α, β and γ motor neurons and are found at all levels of the spinal cord--they are root cells. The a motor neurons are the final common pathway of the motor system, and they innervate the visceral and skeletal muscles.
The distribution of cells and fibers within the gray matter of the spinal cord exhibits a pattern of lamination. The cellular pattern of each lamina is composed of various sizes or shapes of neurons (cytoarchitecture) which led Rexed to propose a new classification based on 10 layers (laminae). This classification is useful since it is related more accurately to function than the previous classification scheme which was based on major nuclear groups (Figure 3.7).

Laminae I to IV, in general, are concerned with exteroceptive sensation and comprise the dorsal horn, whereas laminae V and VI are concerned primarily with proprioceptive sensations. Lamina VII is equivalent to the intermediate zone and acts as a relay between muscle spindle to midbrain and cerebellum, and laminae VIII-IX comprise the ventral horn and contain mainly motor neurons. The axons of these neurons innervate mainly skeletal muscle. Lamina X surrounds the central canal and contains neuroglia.

Rexed lamina I – Consists of a thin layer of cells that cap the tip of the dorsal horn with small dendrites and a complex array of nonmyelinated axons. Cells in lamina I respond mainly to noxious and thermal stimuli. Lamina I cell axons join the contralateral spinothalamic tract; this layer corresponds to nucleus posteromarginalis.

Rexed lamina II – Composed of tightly packed interneurons. This layer corresponds to the substantia gelatinosa and responds to noxious stimuli while others respond to non-noxious stimuli. The majority of neurons in Rexed lamina II axons receive information from sensory dorsal root ganglion cells as well as descending dorsolateral fasciculus (DLF) fibers. They send axons to Rexed laminae III and IV (fasciculus proprius). High concentrations of substance P and opiate receptors have been identified in Rexed lamina II. The lamina is believed to be important for the modulation of sensory input, with the effect of determining which pattern of incoming information will produce sensations that will be interpreted by the brain as being painful.

Rexed lamina III – Composed of variable cell size, axons of these neurons bifurcate several times and form a dense plexus. Cells in this layer receive axodendritic synapses from Aβ fibers entering dorsal root fibers. It contains dendrites of cells from laminae IV, V and VI. Most of the neurons in lamina III function as propriospinal/interneuron cells.

Rexed lamina IV – The thickest of the first four laminae. Cells in this layer receive Aß axons which carry predominantly non-noxious information. In addition, dendrites of neurons in lamina IV radiate to lamina II, and respond to stimuli such as light touch. The ill-defined nucleus proprius is located in the head of this layer. Some of the cells project to the thalamus via the contralateral and ipsilateral spinothalamic tract.

Rexed lamina V – Composed neurons with their dendrites in lamina II. The neurons in this lamina receive monosynaptic information from Aß, Ad and C axons which also carry nociceptive information from visceral organs. This lamina covers a broad zone extending across the neck of the dorsal horn and is divided into medial and lateral parts. Many of the Rexed lamina V cells project to the brain stem and the thalamus via the contralateral and ipsilateral spinothalamic tract. Moreover, descending corticospinal and rubrospinal fibers synapse upon its cells.

Rexed lamina VI – Is a broad layer which is best developed in the cervical and lumbar enlargements. Lamina VI divides also into medial and lateral parts. Group Ia afferent axons from muscle spindles terminate in the medial part at the C8 to L3 segmental levels and are the source of the ipsilateral spinocerebellar pathways. Many of the small neurons are interneurons participating in spinal reflexes, while descending brainstem pathways project to the lateral zone of Rexed layer VI.

Rexed lamina VII – This lamina occupies a large heterogeneous region. This region is also known as the zona intermedia (or intermediolateral nucleus). Its shape and boundaries vary along the length of the cord. Lamina VII neurons receive information from Rexed lamina II to VI as well as visceral afferent fibers, and they serve as an intermediary relay in transmission of visceral motor neurons impulses. The dorsal nucleus of Clarke forms a prominent round oval cell column from C8 to L3. The large cells give rise to uncrossed nerve fibers of the dorsal spinocerebellar tract (DSCT). Cells in laminae V to VII, which do not form a discrete nucleus, give rise to uncrossed fibers that form the ventral spinocerebellar tract (VSCT). Cells in the lateral horn of the cord in segments T1 and L3 give rise to preganglionic sympathetic fibers to innervate postganglionic cells located in the sympathetic ganglia outside the cord. Lateral horn neurons at segments S2 to S4 give rise to preganglionic neurons of the sacral parasympathetic fibers to innervate postganglionic cells located in peripheral ganglia.

Rexed lamina VIII – Includes an area at the base of the ventral horn, but its shape differs at various cord levels. In the cord enlargements, the lamina occupies only the medial part of the ventral horn, where descending vestibulospinal and reticulospinal fibers terminate. The neurons of lamina VIII modulate motor activity, most probably via g motor neurons which innervate the intrafusal muscle fibers.

Rexed lamina IX – Composed of several distinct groups of large a motor neurons and small γ and β motor neurons embedded within this layer. Its size and shape differ at various cord levels. In the cord enlargements the number of α motor neurons increase and they form numerous groups. The α motor neurons are large and multipolar cells and give rise to ventral root fibers to supply extrafusal skeletal muscle fibers, while the small γ motor neurons give rise to the intrafusal muscle fibers. The α motor neurons are somatotopically organized.

Rexed lamina X – Neurons in Rexed lamina X surround the central canal and occupy the commissural lateral area of the gray commissure, which also contains decussating axons.

In summary, laminae I-IV are concerned with exteroceptive sensations, whereas laminae V and VI are concerned primarily with proprioceptive sensation and act as a relay between the periphery to the midbrain and the cerebellum. Laminae VIII and IX form the final motor pathway to initiate and modulate motor activity via α, β and γ motor neurons, which innervate striated muscle. All visceral motor neurons are located in lamina VII and innervate neurons in autonomic ganglia.
Surrounding the gray matter is white matter containing myelinated and unmyelinated nerve fibers. These fibers conduct information up (ascending) or down (descending) the cord. The white matter is divided into the dorsal (or posterior) column (or funiculus), lateral column and ventral (or anterior) column (Figure 3.8). The anterior white commissure resides in the center of the spinal cord, and it contains crossing nerve fibers that belong to the spinothalamic tracts, spinocerebellar tracts, and anterior corticospinal tracts. Three general nerve fiber types can be distinguished in the spinal cord white matter: 1) long ascending nerve fibers originally from the column cells, which make synaptic connections to neurons in various brainstem nuclei, cerebellum and dorsal thalamus, 2) long descending nerve fibers originating from the cerebral cortex and various brainstem nuclei to synapse within the different Rexed layers in the spinal cord gray matter, and 3) shorter nerve fibers interconnecting various spinal cord levels such as the fibers responsible for the coordination of flexor reflexes. Ascending tracts are found in all columns whereas descending tracts are found only in the lateral and the anterior columns.
Four different terms are often used to describe bundles of axons such as those found in the white matter: funiculus, fasciculus, tract, and pathway. Funiculus is a morphological term to describe a large group of nerve fibers which are located in a given area (e.g., posterior funiculus). Within a funiculus, groups of fibers from diverse origins, which share common features, are sometimes arranged in smaller bundles of axons called fasciculus, (e.g., fasciculus proprius [Figure 3.8]). Fasciculus is primarily a morphological term whereas tracts and pathways are also terms applied to nerve fiber bundles which have a functional connotation. A tract is a group of nerve fibers which usually has the same origin, destination, and course and also has similar functions. The tract name is derived from their origin and their termination (i.e., corticospinal tract - a tract that originates in the cortex and terminates in the spinal cord; lateral spinothalamic tract - a tract originated in the lateral spinal cord and ends in the thalamus). A pathway usually refers to the entire neuronal circuit responsible for a specific function, and it includes all the nuclei and tracts which are associated with that function. For example, the spinothalamic pathway includes the cell bodies of origin (in the dorsal root ganglia), their axons as they project through the dorsal roots, synapses in the spinal cord, and projections of second and third order neurons across the white commissure, which ascend to the thalamus in the spinothalamic tracts.
The spinal cord white matter contains ascending and descending tracts.

Ascending tracts (Figure 3.8). The nerve fibers comprise the ascending tract emerge from the first order (1°) neuron located in the dorsal root ganglion (DRG). The ascending tracts transmit sensory information from the sensory receptors to higher levels of the CNS. The ascending gracile and cuneate fasciculi occupying the dorsal column, and sometimes are named the dorsal funiculus. These fibers carry information related to tactile, two point discrimination of simultaneously applied pressure, vibration, position, and movement sense and conscious proprioception. In the lateral column (funiculus), the neospinothalamic tract (or lateral spinothalamic tract) is located more anteriorly and laterally, and carries pain, temperature and crude touch information from somatic and visceral structures. Nearby laterally, the dorsal and ventral spinocerebellar tracts carry unconscious proprioception information from muscles and joints of the lower extremity to the cerebellum. In the ventral column (funiculus) there are four prominent tracts: 1) the paleospinothalamic tract (or anterior spinothalamic tract) is located which carry pain, temperature, and information associated with touch to the brain stem nuclei and to the diencephalon, 2) the spinoolivary tract carries information from Golgi tendon organs to the cerebellum, 3) the spinoreticular tract, and 4) the spinotectal tract. Intersegmental nerve fibers traveling for several segments (2 to 4) and are located as a thin layer around the gray matter is known as fasciculus proprius, spinospinal or archispinothalamic tract. It carries pain information to the brain stem and diencephalon.
Descending tracts (Figure 3.9). The descending tracts originate from different cortical areas and from brain stem nuclei. The descending pathway carry information associated with maintenance of motor activities such as posture, balance, muscle tone, and visceral and somatic reflex activity. These include the lateral corticospinal tract and the rubrospinal tracts located in the lateral column (funiculus). These tracts carry information associated with voluntary movement. Other tracts such as the reticulospinal vestibulospinal and the anterior corticospinal tract mediate balance and postural movements (Figure 3.9). Lissauer's tract, which is wedged between the dorsal horn and the surface of the spinal cord carry the descending fibers of the dorsolateral funiculus (DFL), which regulate incoming pain sensation at the spinal level, and intersegmental fibers. Additional details about ascending and descending tracts are described in the next few chapters.
Information from the skin, skeletal muscle and joints is relayed to the spinal cord by sensory cells located in the dorsal root ganglia. The dorsal root fibers are the axons originated from the primary sensory dorsal root ganglion cells. Each ascending dorsal root axon, before reaching the spinal cord, bifurcates into ascending and descending branches entering several segments below and above their own segment. The ascending dorsal root fibers and the descending ventral root fibers from and to discrete body areas form a spinal nerve (Figure 3.10). There are 31 paired spinal nerves. The dorsal root fibers segregate into lateral and medial divisions. The lateral division contains most of the unmyelinated and small myelinated axons carrying pain and temperature information to be terminated in the Rexed laminae I, II, and IV of the gray matter. The medial division of dorsal root fibers consists mainly of myelinated axons conducting sensory fibers from skin, muscles and joints; it enters the dorsal/posterior column/funiculus and ascend in the dorsal column to be terminated in the ipsilateral nucleus gracilis or nucleus cuneatus at the medulla oblongata region, i.e., the axons of the first-order (1°) sensory neurons synapse in the medulla oblongata on the second order (2°) neurons (in nucleus gracilis or nucleus cuneatus). In entering the spinal cord, all fibers send collaterals to different Rexed lamina.

Axons entering the cord in the sacral region are found in the dorsal column near the midline and comprise the fasciculus gracilis, whereas axons that enter at higher levels are added in lateral positions and comprise the fasciculus cuneatus (Figure 3.11). This orderly representation is termed “somatotopic representation”.
Ventral root fibers are the axons of motor and visceral efferent fibers and emerge from poorly defined ventral lateral sulcus as ventral rootlets. The ventral rootlets from discrete spinal cord section unite and form the ventral root, which contain motor nerve axons from motor and visceral motor neurons. The α motor nerve axons innervate the extrafusal muscle fibers while the small γ motor neuron axons innervate the intrafusal muscle fibers located within the muscle spindles. The visceral neurons send preganglionic fibers to innervate the visceral organs. All these fibers join the dorsal root fibers distal to the dorsal root ganglion to form the spinal nerve (Figure 3.10).
The spinal nerve roots are formed by the union of dorsal and ventral roots within the intervertebral foramen, resulting in a mixed nerve joined together and forming the spinal nerve (Figure 3.10). Spinal nerve rami include the dorsal primary nerves (ramus), which innervates the skin and muscles of the back, and the ventral primary nerves (ramus), which innervates the ventral lateral muscles and skin of the trunk, extremities and visceral organs. The ventral and dorsal roots also provide the anchorage and fixation of the spinal cord to the vertebral cauda.
The arterial blood supply to the spinal cord in the upper cervical regions is derived from two branches of the vertebral arteries, the anterior spinal artery and the posterior spinal arteries (Figure 3.12). At the level of medulla, the paired anterior spinal arteries join to form a single artery that lies in the anterior median fissure of the spinal cord. The posterior spinal arteries are paired and form an anastomotic chain over the posterior aspect of the spinal cord. A plexus of small arteries, the arterial vasocorona, on the surface of the cord constitutes an anastomotic connection between the anterior and posterior spinal arteries. This arrangement provides uninterrupted blood supplies along the entire length of the spinal cord.
At spinal cord regions below upper cervical levels, the anterior and posterior spinal arteries narrow and form an anastomotic network with radicular arteries. The radicular arteries are branches of the cervical, trunk, intercostal & iliac arteries. The radicular arteries supply most of the lower levels of the spinal cord. There are approximately 6 to 8 pairs of radicular arteries supplying the anterior and posterior spinal cord (Figure 3.12).
This chapter describes the general organization of somatosensory pathways and the anatomy of the somatosensory pathways involved in processing discriminative touch and proprioceptive information, and those involved with sharp pain and cool/cold information. Discriminative touch and proprioceptive information allow for the recognition of objects by touch, provide for a sense of our body image and is used for maintaining balance and posture. Sharp, pricking pain and cool/cold information allows for the detection and localization of potential tissue-damaging stimuli in a timely manner.
Sensory pathways consist of the chain of neurons, from receptor organ to cerebral cortex, that are responsible for the perception of sensations.
Within each somatosensory pathway,

The 1° afferent is a pseudounipolar neuron that has its cell body located in a peripheral (spinal or cranial) ganglion. It has a peripheral axon that forms or innervates somatosensory receptors and a central process that synapses with 2° afferent neuron(s) in a spinal cord or brain stem nucleus.
The 2° afferent may synapse with 3° afferent neurons in the spinal cord or may ascend the neuraxis to synapse with 3° afferent neurons in the thalamus.
There is a decussation (i.e., axons crossing the midline to the opposite side of the spinal cord or brain stem) in each somatosensory pathway below the level of the thalamus.
All somatosensory pathways include a thalamic nucleus. The thalamic neurons send their axons in the posterior limb of the internal capsule to end in the cerebral cortex.
Most somatosensory pathways terminate in the parietal lobe of the cerebral cortex.
Each somatosensory pathway is named after a major tract or nucleus in the pathway.

In general, conscious perception of sensory stimuli requires the involvement of neurons in the thalamus and cerebral cortex. For example, electrical stimulation of a structure in pathways connecting muscle and joint receptors to the cerebellum (e.g., electrical stimulation of the anterior spinocerebellar tract) will not produce a sensation of limb movement, as these pathways do not include the thalamus or cortex. In contrast, electrical stimulation of a structure in the posterior column-medial lemniscal pathway (e.g., electrical stimulation of the medial lemniscus) may result in a sensation of limb movement, as this pathway includes the thalamus and terminates in the cerebral cortex.
The morphology of the peripheral somatosensory axon is related to the receptor it innervates or forms and to the sensory information it carries (Figure 4.2).

The Group I and II 1° afferent axons, which form the muscle/tendon receptors and carry body proprioceptive information, have the largest diameter and the thickest myelin of all the somatosensory 1° afferent axons.
The Type C 1° afferent axons, which form free nerve endings and carry dull pain, deep pain, crude touch or warm/hot information, are the smallest 1° afferent axons and are unmyelinated.
The Type Aδ1° afferent axons, which form free nerve endings and carry sharp pain or cool/cold information, are thinly myelinated and larger than the Type C axons.
The Type Aβ 1° afferent axons, which form encapsulated endings in skin and joints or hair follicle endings or Merkel disks in skin, are myelinated and have diameter less than Group I afferents and greater than the Type Aδ 1° afferent axons.
The morphology of the peripheral somatosensory axon is also related to the conduction velocity of the action potentials generated by the axon.

The conduction velocity of an axon is determined by electrically stimulating the axon and recording the time (latency) it takes the electrically elicited action potential to reach a recording electrode (Figure 4.3). The distance traveled from the electrical stimulating site to the recording site divided by the latency provides the conduction velocity of the axon.

As discussed in earlier chapters, the larger and more heavily myelinated the axon, the greater its conduction velocity (Figure 4.3). Consequently, the 1° afferent axons carrying information required for fine motor control and rapid reflex responses (i.e., those forming body proprioceptors) conduct action potentials rapidly, whereas those carrying information about body and object temperature conduct action potentials at a much slower rate.

The whole nerve potential or compound action potential (CAP) is recorded extracellularly from an electrically stimulated nerve and is the sum of the signals produced by each of the individual action potentials of the axons forming the nerve. (Figure 4.3) The mixed nerve (afferent and efferent axons) compound action potential has three prominent peaks that are called A, B and C. The conduction velocity of an axon determines the axon's contribution to the compound action potential peaks. Specifically, the faster the axon conduction velocity, the shorter the latency of axon response and the greater the axon's contribution to the shorter latency peaks (e.g., compare columns CAP Peak and Conduction Velocity in Table I). The axons contributing to a given compound action potential peak (e.g., peak A) are named according to the peak name (e.g., Type A axon). When the relative amplitudes of the peaks differ from those generated by "normal" nerves, the types of damaged axons can be assessed by determining which peaks are abnormal. Consequently, the compound action potential is used clinically to detect nerve damage and to monitor the progress of the regeneration of damaged nerves.
For historical reasons, the terminology based on axon conduction velocity (Group I, II, III and IV) is used for afferent and efferent axons innervating muscles and tendons. And the terminology based on the compound action potential (Type A, B or C) is used for afferent axons innervating the skin, joints and viscera.

Note that the fastest conducting somatosensory 1° afferents (Group Ia) innervate skeletal muscle and the slowest (C-fibers) form the receptors of the pain systems. While one might expect painful, tissue damaging stimuli to have priority over all other somatosensory stimuli, the afferent information required to control the reaction to the painful stimuli are conveyed by the faster conducting muscle and joint afferents. Even afferents providing more exact information about the location of a cutaneous stimulus, the Aβ axons, conduct at a faster rate than the Aδ and C axons carrying information about painful stimuli.
Somatosensory neurons are topographically (i.e., spatially) organized so that adjacent neurons represent neighboring regions of the body or face (Figure 4.4). This organization is preserved by a precise point-to-point somatotopic pattern of connections from the spinal cord and brain stem to the thalamus and cortex. Consequently, within each somatosensory pathway there is a complete map (spatial representation) of the body or face in each of the somatosensory nuclei, tracts, and cortex. Additional information on somatotopic organization is presented in Chapter 5 of Section II.
The sensory information processed by the somatosensory systems travels along different anatomical pathways depending on the information carried. For example, the posterior column-medial lemniscal pathway carries discriminative touch and proprioceptive information from the body, and the main sensory trigeminal pathway carries this information from the face. Whereas, the spinothalamic pathways carry crude touch, pain and temperature information from the body, and the spinal trigeminal pathway carries this information from the face.
The posterior (dorsal) column - medial lemniscal pathway (i.e., the medial lemniscal pathway) carries and processes discriminative touch and proprioceptive information from the body (Figure 4.5). It is important to keep in mind that within the medial lemniscal pathway, the afferents carrying discriminative touch information are kept separate from those carrying proprioceptive information up to the level of the cerebral cortex.
The peripheral axons of the 1° afferents are myelinated, large or medium diameter axons. Each axon travels via a posterior root, spinal nerve and peripheral nerve to skin, muscle or joint- where it forms or innervates a somatosensory receptor.
The 1° medial lemniscal afferent peripheral process that end in the

skin, are Aβ axons that branch to innervate hair follicles or Merkel’s cells or form Meissner, Pacinian or Ruffini corpuscles.
joints, are Aβ axons that branch to form encapsulated endings similar to the Ruffini and Pacinian corpuscles and Golgi tendon organs.
muscle, are Group I and II axons that branch to terminate in muscle spindles (Ia and II axons) or Golgi tendon organs (Ib axons).
The 1° medial lemniscal afferent central axons

join a posterior root, enters the spinal cord, and ascends to the brain stem in the posterior column of the spinal cord (Figure 4.5).
of coccygeal to mid-thoracic posterior roots (i.e., up to T7) ascend the spinal cord in the ipsilateral gracile fasciculus.
of the upper thoracic (level T6 and above) and cervical roots collect in the ipsilateral cuneate fasciculus.
of the gracile and cuneate fasciculi are collectively called the posterior funiculus or posterior column.
ascends the spinal cord in the posterior funiculus up to the medulla without synapsing or decussating (i.e., without crossing the midline to the contralateral half of the spinal cord).
In the medulla,

the 1° afferents in the gracile fasciculus synapse in the gracile nucleus
the 1° afferents in the cuneate fasciculus synapse in the cuneate nucleus.
the axons of the gracile and cuneate nuclei (2° afferents) pass anteriorly and decussate to form the medial lemniscus, contralateral to their cells of origin.
above the level of the gracile and cuneate nuclei, each half of the body is represented contralaterally (e.g., left half of body in right medial lemniscus) within the medial lemniscal pathway.
The 2° medial lemniscal afferents

ascend the brain stem in the medial lemniscus to the diencephalon.
terminate in the ventral posterolateral (VPL) nucleus of the thalamus.
carrying cutaneous information terminate in the core of the VPL.
carrying proprioceptive information terminate in the surrounding shell of the VPL.
The axons of the VPL 3° afferent neurons

travel in the posterior limb of the internal capsule.
terminate in the postcentral gyrus and posterior paracentral lobule of the parietal lobe.
The postcentral gyrus and posterior paracentral lobule

are called the primary somatosensory cortex.
are the primary cortical receiving areas of the somatosensory system.
The lower part of the body (foot and leg) are represented in the posterior paracentral lobule, whereas the upper body (chest, arm, and hand) are represented in the upper postcentral gyrus (See Figure 4.4).
The action potentials ascend the spinal cord via the central process of the 1° afferent in the fasciculus gracilis of the posterior column until they reach the medulla. In the medulla, the action potentials initiate the release of neurotransmitter from the 1° afferent axon terminals onto 2° afferents within the gracile nucleus. The 2° afferent generates action potentials that are conducted by its axons, which decussate to form the medial lemniscus. These action potentials are conducted by the 2° afferent axon contralateral to their site of origin and contralateral to the foot where the stimulus was applied. The action potentials ascend to the thalamus where they initiate the release of neurotransmitter from the 2° afferent axon terminals. They release neurotransmitters onto the 3° afferents in the core of the VPL of the thalamus. The action potentials generated by the 3° VPL afferents are conducted by their axons, which travel in the posterior limb of the internal capsule, to the posterior paracentral lobule of the parietal cortex. These action potentials initiate the release of neurotransmitter from the 3° afferent axon terminals onto cortical neurons and initiate the higher-order processing of the stimulus information generated by the Meissner corpuscle. The point-to-point connections within the pathway provide the basis for a somatotopic map that is used to locate the area of contact with the stimulus and for modality specific information used to identify the stimulus as tactile and from a Meissner corpuscle.
The main sensory trigeminal pathway carries and processes discriminative touch and proprioceptive information from the face (Figure 4.7). Consequently, it is the cranial homologue of the medial lemniscal pathway.
The cranial 1° main sensory trigeminal afferent neurons

peripheral processes are located in the trigeminal (predominantly), facial, glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves.
form mechanoreceptors in the skin, mucous membranes, muscles and joints of the face. The relationship between receptor type formed and the axon Type/Group are similar to those of the medial lemniscal 1° afferents.
have pseudounipolar cell bodies in the cranial ganglia of the trigeminal, facial, glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves (Table II).
send their central axons to the brain stem.
synapse in the main sensory trigeminal nucleus (2° afferents).
The main sensory trigeminal 2° afferent axons

decussate immediately on leaving the main sensory trigeminal nucleus.
join the contralateral ventral trigeminal lemniscus.
above the level of the main sensory trigeminal nucleus (i.e., the mid pons), carries information about the contralateral face (i.e., the right ventral trigeminal lemniscus carries information about the left side of the face).
The 2° main sensory trigeminal afferents in the ventral trigeminal lemniscus

ascend to the diencephalon.
terminate in the ventral posteromedial (VPM) nucleus of the thalamus.
The axons of the 3° main sensory trigeminal afferents (VPM neurons)

travel in the posterior limb of the internal capsule.
end in the postcentral gyrus of the parietal lobe.
The postcentral gyrus

is part of the primary cortical receiving area of the somatosensory system.
The face is represented in the lower half of the postcentral gyrus (See Figure 4.4).

Figure 4,8 illustrates the course of action potentials generated in response to touching the left cheek with a wisp of cotton. A Merkel receptor in the left cheek is stimulated, and its 1° afferent generates action potentials that are conducted by the 1° afferent Ab axon, past its pseudounipolar soma, into the brain stem.
The 1° afferent central process conducts the action potentials into the pons where they initiate the release neurotransmitter from the 1° afferent axon terminals. The neurotransmitter is released onto 2° afferents within the main sensory trigeminal nucleus. The 2° afferent generates action potentials that are conducted along its axon, which decussates in the pons to join the ventral trigeminal lemniscus. These action potentials are conducted by the 2° afferent axon contralateral to their site of origin and contralateral to the site where the stimulus was applied. The action potentials ascend to the thalamus where they initiate the release of neurotransmitter from the 2° afferent axon terminals. They release neurotransmitters onto the 3° afferents in the core of the VPM of the thalamus. The action potentials generated by the 3° VPM afferents are conducted by their axons, which travel in the posterior limb of the internal capsule, to the postcentral gyrus of the parietal cortex. These action potentials initiate the release of neurotransmitter from the 3° afferent axon terminals onto cortical neurons and initiate the higher-order processing of the stimulus information generated by the Merkel cell. The point-to-point connections within the pathway provide the basis for a somatotopic map that is used to locate the area of contact with the stimulus and for modality specific information used to identify the stimulus as tactile and from a Merkel cell.

There is a minor proprioceptive component for the jaw in cranial nerve V that has 1° afferent cell bodies located in the mesencephalic trigeminal nucleus. The peripheral axons of these afferents travel in the mandibular branch of the trigeminal nerve and end in the jaw muscles and joint. The central processes of most of these afferents end in the trigeminal motor nucleus that controls the muscles of the jaw. Few synapse in the main sensory trigeminal nucleus.
The neospinothalamic pathway carries and processes sharp, pricking pain and dropping temperature (cool/cold) information from the body (Figure 4.9). The pain information carried by the neospinothalamic pathway is well localized and the sensations are the short lasting “fast” or “first” pain elicited by tissue-damaging cutaneous stimuli. The neospinothalamic pathway is also characterized by somatotopic representation, which allows for accurate localization of the painful stimulus.

Recall that there are multiple spinal pathways processing pain information (see Somatosensory Systems Table I). Most of the ascending afferents of the spinal pain pathways travel with the neospinothalamic afferents in a fiber tract called the "spinothalamic tract" or "anterolateral spinothalamic tract". Elements of these other pain pathways will be mentioned below to help you understand how pain sensations may remain after damage to the neospinothalamic pathway. The pain pathways will be covered in greater detail in later chapters.
The 1° neospinothalamic afferents

have Type Aδ peripheral axons that form free nerve endings in skin, muscles and joints.
have central processes that enter the spinal cord.
synapse in the posterior marginal nucleus (2° afferents) of the posterior horn.
The 2° neospinothalamic afferent axons

decussate in the spinal cord anterior white commissure.
form the lateral part of the spinothalamic tract in the lateral funiculus.
Note that the fibers in the lateral spinothalamic tract are contralateral to their cells of origin and contralateral to the body area they represent.

The crossed 2° neospinothalamic afferent axons

ascend the spinal cord and brain stem as part of the spinothalamic tract.
travel with other pain (archispinothalamic) afferents that leave the spinothalamic tract and terminate in the brain stem as:
spinoreticular fibers that end in the reticular formation of the brain stem.
spinomesencephalic fibers that end near the periaqueductal gray of the midbrain.
travel with other pain (paleospinothalamic) afferents to the diencephalon where
the neospinothalamic afferents terminate in the ventral posterolateral (VPL) nucleus of the thalamus.
the paleospinothalamic afferents terminate in the intralaminar nuclei of the thalamus.
The spinothalamic afferent axons from the thalamus

travel in the posterior limb of the internal capsule.
VPL (i.e., the 3° neospinothalamics) end in the postcentral gyrus and posterior paracentral lobule of the parietal lobe.
Intralaminar nuclei (i.e., paleospinothalamics) end in the insula and rostral cingulate gyrus.
The postcentral gyrus and posterior paracentral lobule are

the neospinothalamic pathway termination sites.
the primary cortical receiving areas for sharp, cutting pain information.
not the exclusive cortical receiving area for pain information.
The insula and rostral cingulate gyrus

are the archispinothalamic and paleospinothalamic pathways' termination sites.
receive dull and deep pain information.
are responsible for poorly localized, longer lasting pain sensations and add the emotional (i.e., unpleasant) features to these sensations.
The action potentials enter the spinal cord via the central process of the 1° afferents to initiate the release neurotransmitter from the 1° afferent axon terminals onto 2° afferents within the posterior marginal nucleus. The 2° afferent generates action potentials that are conducted by its axon, which decussates in the anterior white commissure of the spinal cord. The crossed 2° neospinothalamic afferent axons form the lateral component of the spinothalamic tract. The action potentials conducted by the crossed 2° afferent axon are contralateral to their site of origin and contralateral to the foot where the stimulus was applied. The action potentials ascend to the thalamus where they initiate the release of neurotransmitter from the 2° afferent axon terminals. They release neurotransmitters onto the 3° afferents in the VPL of the thalamus. The action potentials generated by the 3° VPL afferents are conducted by their axons, which travel in the posterior limb of the internal capsule, to the posterior paracentral lobule of the parietal cortex. These action potentials initiate the release of neurotransmitter from the 3° afferent axon terminals onto cortical neurons and initiate the higher-order processing of the stimulus information generated by the free nerve ending. The point-to-point connections within the pathway provide the basis for a somatotopic map that is used to locate the area of contact with the stimulus and for modality specific information used to identify the stimulus as a sharp pinprick.
The spinal trigeminal pathway carries and processes crude touch, pain and temperature information from the face (Figure 4.11) Consequently, it is the cranial homologue of the spinothalamic pathways i.e., homologous to all the spinothalamic pathways, the archi-, paleo- and neospinothalamic pathways. As in the spinothalamic pathways, the afferents carrying crude touch information are kept separate from those carrying temperature information and from others carrying pain information. Also the trigeminal afferents carrying sharp, cutting pain information are segregated from those carrying dull, burning pain and deep aching pain information.
The 1° spinal trigeminal afferents

are located in the same nerves and ganglia as those of the main sensory trigeminal pathway (Table II).
have Aδ and C peripheral axons that form free nerve endings in the dura and face.
on entering the brain stem, form the spinal trigeminal tract.
The spinal trigeminal tract

extends from mid pontine levels (the level of entry of trigeminal nerve) down to C1 of the spinal cord.
consists of spinal trigeminal 1° afferent axons (predominantly of the trigeminal nerve).
1° afferents synapse in the spinal trigeminal nucleus (2° spinal trigeminal afferents).
The 2° spinal trigeminal afferent axons

decussate and form the ventral trigeminal lemniscus contralateral to their cells of origin.
ascend in the ventral trigeminal lemniscus as crossed 2° spinal trigeminal afferents.
travel with afferents that leave the ventral trigeminal lemniscus as trigeminoreticular fibers, which terminate in the brain stem reticular formation.
are joined by the crossed 2° main sensory trigeminal afferents at mid-pons.
travel with afferents that leave the ventral trigeminal lemniscus as trigeminomesencephalic fibers, which terminate near the midbrain periaqueductal gray.
terminate in the VPM and in the intralaminar nuclei of the thalamus.
Multiple thalamic nuclei process information in this pathway

the VPM processes sharp pricking pain.
the intralaminar nuclei processes other poorly localized sensations of dull, burning pain, deep, aching pain, temperature and crude touch.
The 3° spinal trigeminal afferent axons from the thalamus:

travel in the posterior limb of the internal capsule.
end in multiple areas of the cerebral cortex.
The spinal trigeminal pathway terminates in multiple cortical areas:

the 3° VPM axons end in the primary somatosensory cortex (See Figure 4.4), which provides for accurate localization in the face area of the source of the sharp, pricking pain.
the intralaminar nuclei axons terminate in the cingulate gyrus and insula of the cerebral cortex, which provide for poorly localized sensations of dull and aching pain, temperature and crude touch.
The 1° afferent central process bypasses the main sensory trigeminal nucleus and descends the brain stem in the spinal trigeminal tract. The action potentials are conducted in this descending tract to the spinal trigeminal nucleus, where they initiate the release neurotransmitter from the 1° afferent axon terminals. The neurotransmitter is released onto 2° afferents within the spinal trigeminal nucleus. The 2° afferent generates action potentials that are conducted along its axon, which decussates to form the ventral trigeminal lemniscus. These action potentials are conducted by the 2° afferent axon contralateral to their site of origin and contralateral to the cheek where the stimulus was applied. The action potentials ascend to the thalamus where they initiate the release of neurotransmitter from the 2° afferent axon terminals. They release neurotransmitters onto the 3° afferents in the VPM. The action potentials generated by the 3° VPM afferents are conducted by their axons, which travel in the posterior limb of the internal capsule, to the postcentral gyrus of the parietal cortex. These action potentials initiate the release of neurotransmitter from the 3° afferent axon terminals onto cortical neurons and initiate the higher-order processing of the stimulus information generated by the free nerve ending. The point-to-point connections within the pathway provide the basis for a somatotopic map that is used to locate the area of contact with the stimulus and for modality specific information used to identify the stimulus as a sharp pinprick.
Clinically, it is important to remember what information is carried by a particular pathway and the level of the pathway at which decussation occurs (Figure 4.13).
For example, if the posterior funiculus were sectioned, sparing the rest of the spinal cord, discriminative touch and proprioception would be affected but not pain, temperature, or crude touch. Also, the loss of discriminative touch and proprioception would be ipsilesional (e.g., on the right side of the body with section of the right posterior column) because the 1° afferent axons in the posterior columns do not decussate. Consequently, damage to the posterior column in the spinal cord would be suspected if a patient presented with a loss of discriminative touch and proprioception in the right leg and foot, with no change in pain or temperature sense in the body or face. This area of loss resulted because the ascending medial lemniscal 1° afferent axons from coccygeal to lower thoracic levels were cut off from the brain stem, and the information they carried could not be sent on to the thalamus and cortex. In contrast, a stroke affecting the posterior paracentral lobule would produce sensory deficits in discriminative touch, proprioception and sharp pricking pain contralateral to the site of stroke. However such a stroke would affect other pain, temperature and crude touch sensations less than a large spinal cord lesion because these somatic sensations are represented in diffuse areas of the cortex.

Previous chapters described the ways in which the different somatosensory receptors respond to specific types of somatosensory stimuli and that the receptors, by virtue of their selective sensitivities, extract specific information about the somatosensory stimulus. The specificity of the receptors forms the basis for a parsing (i.e., a sorting) of somatosensory experience into separate “information channels” or pathways. For example, sharp-pricking pain is mediated in the neospinothalamic (information channel) pathway, whereas proprioception is mediated in the medial lemniscus pathway. Recall that the receptor's extraction of somatosensory information is very specific (e.g., during limb movement, muscle spindles respond to muscle stretch, whereas Golgi tendon organs respond to muscle contraction) and the processing of this extracted information is kept separate along most of the ascending pathway. In addition to this parsing of stimulus information, the somatosensory system is also organized to provide a somatotopic representation of the body surface and parts. The resulting spatial maps provide the anatomical basis for our ability to localize somatosensory stimuli and for our sense of a 'body image".
As described above, the nervous system reduces somatosensory experience into parallel streams of neural activity - a decomposition of the experience into stimulus fragments spread over body pieces. So how does one have a sense of "oneness" of the body and how does one identify an object by handling it? One can do so because somatosensory information converges in the parietal lobe of the cerebral cortex to provide a cohesive perception of the body and of somatosensory stimuli.
The first part of this chapter will present additional details about the general organization of the somatosensory system and how somatosensory information is represented and processed in the parietal cortex. This understanding of the general organization of the somatosensory pathways will be used in the clinical assessments of somatosensory function.
In each of the somatosensory pathways covered thus far, afferent axons decussate (cross the midline) once on their course to the thalamus (Figure 5.1).
Above the level of decussation, the neurons in a somatosensory pathway represent the contralateral (i.e., opposite) side of the body or face. It is important to learn the decussation site, as it will aid in clinical diagnosis. When an afferent pathway is damaged somewhere below the site of decussation, the sensory loss will be on the side ipsilateral to the lesion (i.e., the loss is on the same side as the lesion or ipsilesional). When an afferent pathway is damaged somewhere above the site of decussation, the sensory loss will be on the side contralateral to the lesion (i.e., the loss is on the side opposite the lesion or contralesional).

In the medial lemniscal pathway, the axons of the gracile and cuneate nuclei decussate in the medulla. The decussation in the neospinothalamic pathway is in the spinal cord and involves the axons of the posterior marginal nucleus. The spinal trigeminal nucleus axons decussate upon leaving the nucleus in the medulla and lower pons, whereas the main sensory trigeminal nucleus axons decussate at mid pons levels immediately upon leaving the nucleus.
The sensory information necessary for discriminative touch, proprioception, pain and thermal sensations are kept separate within the somatosensory pathways (Figure 5.2).
To ensure the fidelity of stimulus representation in the discriminative touch-proprioceptive pathways, there is minimal convergence of modality specific information along the pathways. That is, within the medial lemniscal and main sensory trigeminal pathways, there is little mixing of information from different receptor types and from afferents with different adaptive properties up to the level of the cerebral cortex. For example, a cuneate nucleus neuron (2° medial lemniscal afferent) will synapse only with one type of posterior root neuron (e.g., 1° afferents with small “touch” receptive fields and rapidly adapting discharges). Within VPL and VPM, the medial lemniscal and ventral trigeminal lemniscal fibers terminate in different regions based on the sensory information they are carrying. Fibers carrying cutaneous information terminate within the core of the nucleus, whereas those carrying proprioceptive information terminate in the surrounding, peripheral shell of the nucleus.

Within the cerebral cortex, there is a convergence of modality specific information and the response properties of cortical neurons become more complex. The primary somatosensory cortex is responsible for the first stage of cortical processing. Within the primary sensory cortex, discriminative touch and proprioceptive information from overlapping areas may be combined such that a cortical neuron may respond to both cutaneous and proprioceptive stimulation of a digit.
Each subcortical somatosensory neuron responds to modality-specific stimuli applied to a specific region of the body or face.

For example, an axon in the medial lemniscus (i.e., the fiber tract) that responds to tactile stimulation of the right index finger pad will not respond to tactile stimulation of any other area in the hand, body or face. The stimulated area producing the response is called the neuron’s receptive field (Figure 5.3). The neuron’s receptive field can also be defined anatomically as that area of the sense organ (i.e., skin, muscles or joints) innervated directly or indirectly by the neuron. Consequently, a somatosensory neuron can be described to channel information about stimulus location - as well as stimulus modality. Furthermore, the size of a neuron’s receptive field is related to the body area innervated/represented. The receptive fields of neurons innervating/representing the finger pads, lips, and tongue are the smallest, whereas those of neurons innervating/representing the shoulders, back and legs are the largest. For greater accuracy in locating the point of stimulus contact or movement, smaller cutaneous receptive fields are required. For fine motor control, as in playing the piano or speaking, small proprioceptive receptive fields are required.
Within each somatosensory structure, neurons are organized to provide a spatial representation of the body and face called the somatotopic map (Figure 5.4). That is, within the spinal cord, brain stem, thalamus and postcentral gyrus, the location of a neuron is related to its receptive field. Consequently, body and face (i.e., the receptive fields) are represented spatially (topographically) within nuclei and cortex such that, neurons with contiguous receptive fields are located adjacent to one another within a given structure. For example, adjoining areas of the body are represented in adjoining areas of the cortex (Figure 5.4). The resulting neural maps of the body and face are not isomorphic representations and appear distorted because of the disproportionate representation of the hand and face areas (Figure 5.4). That is, as the neurons representing the hand and face have small receptive fields (Figure 5.3), a greater number of neurons are required to represent the hand and face. Because somatosensory neurons represent specific stimulus features and specific areas of the body or face, electrical stimulation of a restricted area of the postcentral gyrus (e.g., the area representing the tongue) will produce a somatic (and not gustatory) sensation that is perceived as arising from the specific region of the body (i.e., the tongue).
Somatosensory information converges in the parietal lobe of the cerebral cortex where it is processed to provide a cohesive perception of your body and your physical environment.
The primary somatosensory cortex, SI, includes the postcentral gyrus and the posterior paracentral lobule of the parietal lobe (Figure 5.4 & 5.5).
SI extends from the depths of the central sulcus up superiorly to form the posterior lip of the central sulcus. SI is considered the primary somatosensory cortex because it is the major site of termination of VPL and VPM axons:

its neurons are responsive to somatosensory stimuli almost exclusively;
lesions of SI produce severe somatosensory deficits; and
electrical stimulation of SI produces somatosensory perceptions.
SI is somatotopically organized. The body and face are mapped in the contralateral cortex with the foot and leg represented in the posterior paracentral lobule and the trunk, chest, arm and hand in the upper half of the postcentral gyrus. The face is represented in the lower half of the postcentral gyrus (Figure 5.4).

Differential projections to the SI areas arise from the central core and shell of VPM and VPL. However, there is also convergence of somatotopic and modality specific information in SI. To appreciate the shape, texture, size, weight, and movement of a given object, the somatosensory cortex must integrate the parallel streams of information carried by the medial lemniscal pathway. To achieve this integration, the parallel streams converge at cortical levels, starting in SI. As a result of this convergence, receptive fields become larger, modality specificity diminishes, and the cortical neural responses become more complex.

SI neurons send their axons to the secondary somatosensory cortex, adjacent areas of the parietal lobe, and to cortical motor areas (Figure 5.6) as well as to subcortical nuclei, brain stem and spinal cord. Unilateral destruction of SI produces severe deficits in all aspects of discriminative touch and proprioception on the contralesional side of the body. In addition to deficits in the abilities to accurately localize and to recognize objects by shape, texture and size and to appreciate vibrating/moving stimuli, there are deficits in fine motor coordination.
The secondary somatosensory cortex, SII, is located inferiorly - in the pars opercularis of the parietal lobe, which forms part of upper lip of the lateral sulcus (Figure 5.4 & Figure 5.5). SII neurons send their axons to SI, association cortex, motor cortex, and insula (Figure 5.6). The latter projection, to the insula, influences structures such as the amygdala and hippocampus. These structures are important in tactile learning and memory. The projection to the somatosensory association cortex is involved in higher order processing required for recognizing hand-held objects by texture and size. Consequently, lesions in SII produce deficits in learning by object manipulation and in recognizing the texture and size of hand-held objects.
The somatosensory association cortex is located in the superior parietal lobe (a.k.a. posterior parietal cortex), which is posterior to SI. The highest degree of convergence of somatosensory information occurs in the posterior parietal cortex. The posterior parietal cortex receives the axons of SI and SII neurons and also receives input from the visual system and other systems involved in attention and motivation.

Neurons in the posterior parietal cortex are responsive to somatosensory and visual stimuli, have large somatic receptive fields in which responsiveness is based on stimulus context, and are often more responsive to stimulus movement.

Large lesions involving the posterior parietal cortex and the adjoining superior temporal gyrus may result in an attentional deficit called “neglect”, wherein there is a partial neglect (inattention) to tactile, proprioceptive and/or visual stimuli delivered contralateral to the lesion site. The patient is described as ignoring the contralesional half of her/his body and space. The perception of a "whole" body is lost and the body parts affected may be considered to belong to someone else. Visual stimuli on the contralesional side may also be ignored.
Pain information is processed in multiple pathways (see Table 1 in the chapter on Somatosensory Systems) involving multiple thalamic nuclei that project to multiple cortical areas. In addition to the somatosensory cortex, painful stimuli activate neurons in the rostral cingulate gyrus and the insula. Consequently, all pain sensation is not lost when the primary somatosensory cortex is damaged. Primary somatosensory cortex neurons that have small receptive fields and are selectively responsive to sharp, cutting painful stimuli are considered to provide the ability to accurately localize the exact point of contact with the painful stimulus. Lesions of the primary somatosensory cortex will affect the quality of pain sensations and the ability to localize the exact location of the painful stimulus.
An excellent way to test your knowledge of the material presented thus far is by examining the effects of damage to structures within the somatosensory pathways. The observed sensory loss(s) provide clues to the pathway(s) affected; and the area(s) and side of the body/face affected provide clues to the level of the damage. The following section should help you determine how well you can utilize what you have learned thus far about the somatosensory system.
Peripheral Nerve Damage: Damage to peripheral nerves often results in sensory and motor symptoms. The sensory losses would include all somatosensory sensations if the peripheral nerve contains all the afferent axons supplying the skin, muscles and joints of a given body part (e.g., the hand or jaw). The motor losses may be severe (i.e., total paralysis) if the peripheral nerve contains all of the motor axons controlling the muscles of the normally innervated body part.
Damage to peripheral nerves results in a loss of all somatosensory modalities and motor function in a restricted area of the body defined by the nerve distribution. Electrophysiological methods can be used to determine the nerves involved and the degree of nerve damage (Refer to the section "Peripheral Somatosensory Axons" in the chapter on Somatosensory Pathways).

Posterior or Cranial Nerve Root Damage: The central processes of the 1° somatosensory afferents collect to form a posterior root prior to entering the spinal cord. Consequently, the area of the body supplied by a single posterior root is represented by the sum of receptive fields of the 1° afferents in the root. The area of the body innervated by a posterior root is called a dermatome (Figure 5.11). Posterior root damage would result in somatosensory losses in the dermatome supplied by the root. All sensations would be lost in the central area of the dermatome. The more peripheral areas of the dermatome will have some sensation, albeit less than normal, as consecutive roots have partially overlapping dermatomes.
The symptoms produced by cranial nerve root damage depend upon the cranial nerve involved. For example, the trigeminal nerve root contains somatosensory (major) and chemosensory (minor) 1° afferent axons innervating the face, as well as efferent (motor) axons controlling the jaw muscles (Refer to Table 2 in the chapter on Somatosensory Pathways for the cranial nerves providing somatosensory innervation of the face and dura).
Symptoms. The patient complains of a loss of sensation along the side of his left arm that extends down to include the thumb of his left hand (Figure 5.12). Physical examination determines that there are decreases in the abilities to detect vibration and position involving the left elbow and thumb and loss of touch and pain sensations along the lateral edge of the left arm down to the thumb. Touch, vibration, position, and pain sensations are normal for the rest of the body and face.
Section of a Posterior Root results in the loss of all somatosensory modalities in a restricted area of the body defined by the root dermatome (Figure 5.11). Consequently, the damaged posterior root can be identified by the dermatomal pattern of sensory loss. Radiographic methods can be used to determine if the roots are being compressed by abnormalities in the vertebra.
Spinal Cord Damage: Although there are numerous tracts in the spinal cord, the tracts considered to be of major clinical importance are limited. There are three major ascending tracts in the spinal cord, the posterior funiculus (which includes the gracilis and cuneatus fasciculi, aka posterior columns); the spinothalamic tract (in the anterior and lateral funiculi); and the posterior spinocerebellar tract (in the lateral funiculus).

Clinical symptoms of spinal cord damage are obvious when the posterior columns and/or spinothalamic tract are affected. The posterior spinocerebellar tract carries unconscious proprioceptive information and damage to it does not result in sensory losses.
When a somatosensory tract is sectioned in the spinal cord, the sensory losses start at the level of the lesion and extend down to encompass lower parts of the body. Such a loss occurs because the flow of ascending afferent information from the lesion site and lower body is interrupted and cannot reach the thalamus and cerebral cortex.
The spinothalamic tracts are crossed in the spinal cord. The decussation in the medial lemniscal pathway occurs in the lower medulla.
The cranial nerves, which are associated with the brain stem, supply the motor and sensory innervation of the face. Consequently, spinal cord lesions do not produce sensory or motor losses involving the face. When somatosensory losses are isolated to the body, spinal cord lesions should be suspected.
Unilateral lesion of one descending tract, the corticospinal tract in the lateral funiculus, produces the most obvious motor deficits (i.e., deficits in voluntary motor control below the level of the lesion).
Symptoms: The patient complains of problems with walking, especially at night when there is little light. He also reports a loss of sensation in his right foot. Physical examination determines that there are decreases in vibration and position sensations and poor localization of tactile stimuli involving the right half of his body starting just below the right nipple and extending down to include his right foot (Figure 5.15). Pain sensation is normal in the right torso, leg and foot. Touch, vibration, position and pain sensations are normal for the rest of the body and face. The Romberg test is positive. (i.e., The patient has difficulty standing upright with his feet together and his eyes closed.)
When only the posterior column of the spinal cord is damaged, there are losses involving discriminative touch and proprioception, but no loss of pain, temperature or crude touch sensitivity. The deficit is ipsilesional and extends down the body from the level of the lesion. There is an inability to appreciate vibrating stimuli and the position and movement in the ipsilesional lower body. The remaining tactile sense in the ipsilesional lower body is poorly localized as the spinothalamic tracts are undamaged. The Romberg test is positive as the patient has lost proprioception in a leg and cannot maintain normal posture with eyes closed.
Symptoms: The patient presents with a complaint of repeatedly injuring his left foot. Physical examination determines that there are losses of pain and temperature sensations involving the left half of his body starting just below the left nipple and extending down to include his left foot (Figure 5.19). However, discriminative touch, and position sensations are normal in the left torso, leg and foot. Touch, vibration, position, pain, and temperature sensations are normal for the rest of the body and face. The result of the Romberg test is negative.
Anterolateral cordotomy has been used to relieve intractable pain. When the cut is limited to section of the spinothalamic tract, there is a decrease in pain and temperature sensitivity. As the posterior funiculus is not involved in the section, discriminative touch and proprioception remain intact. The deficit in pain and temperature sensitivity is contralesional and extends down the length of the body from the site of the lesion. However, pain sensation often returns, albeit in a different form, following the surgical section of the spinothalamic tract.
The patient suffers from loss of pain and temperature sensations from the left half of the body starting just below the left nipple and extending down to and including his left foot. He also exhibits loss of discriminative touch and proprioception in a corresponding area on the right side of his body.

Symptoms: The patient exhibits a loss in voluntary control of the right leg. He also reports loss of sensation in both feet (Figure 5.23). Physical examination determines that there are losses of pain and temperature sensations involving the left half of his body starting just below the left nipple and extending down to include his left foot. There are also loss of vibration and position sensations and poor localization of tactile stimuli on the right side of his body starting just below the right nipple and extending down to include his right foot. Touch, vibration, position and pain sensations are normal for the rest of the body and face. The Romberg test is positive (i.e., The patient has difficulty standing upright with his feet together and his eyes closed).
Hemisection of the Spinal Cord. The symptoms resulting from hemisection of the spinal cord (i.e., damage to the right or left half of the spinal cord) are collectively called the Brown-Sequard syndrome (Figure 5.27). There are both motor and sensory losses: for now learn that the motor losses involve weakness, loss of fine motor control, and abnormal reflexes (which are characteristic of “upper motor” neuron damage) on the ipsilesional side starting at the level of the lesion and extending down the body. For example, if the right spinal cord is sectioned, say at T5, the motor effect is on the right side starting at the chest and extending down to and including the right leg and foot. Because spinal cord hemisection interrupts both the posterior column and spinothalamic tracts, there will be sensory losses that are bilateral: ipsilesional for the posterior column (discriminative touch and proprioception) and contralesional for the spinothalamic tracts (pain and temperature). As the sensory losses in each half of the body differ, they are sometimes referred to as “dissociate anesthesia.”
Symptoms: The patient exhibits loss of pain and temperature sensations that are bilateral and limited to his waist area (i.e., like a cummerbund, Figure 5.28). While pain sensation is diminished around the waist, it is normal above and below the waist. Discriminative touch, vibration and position senses are normal in the waist area and for the rest of the body and face.
In syringomyelia, there are cysts that form within the spinal cord near the central canal (Figure 5.31). As the cyst grows, it first compresses and then destroys the decussating fibers in the anterior white commissure. Many of these fibers belong to the spinothalamic tracts and the resulting sensory loss involves pain and temperature sensation bilaterally and segmentally. The bilateral loss is described to form a belt or girdle pattern - if the damage involves the lower thoracic segments, and does not involve sensation below and above the cyst (i.e., it is segmental). As the cyst grows, it may involve anterior horn motor neurons and produce such “lower motor” signs as weakness, muscle wasting, and loss of reflexes.
Brain Stem. Trauma, stroke, multiple sclerosis (a disease of myelin), and brain tumors are the major causes of brain stem lesions. The location of the lesion site can often be deduced by the loss in cranial nerve function.

Eleven of the thirteen cranial nerves are associated with the brain stem and may be damaged with brain stem lesions.
Most of the 1° somatosensory afferents carrying crude touch, pain and temperature information from the face enter the brain stem at mid pontine levels and descend down to second cervical segment of the spinal cord.
Axons in the spinothalamic pathway decussate in the spinal cord. The decussation in the medial lemniscal pathway occurs in the lower medulla. Consequently, both the spinothalamic tract and medial lemniscus represent the contralateral side of the body at and above the upper (open) medulla.
The spinal trigeminal 2° afferents decussate upon leaving the spinal trigeminal nucleus in the medulla and lower pons, whereas the main sensory trigeminal nucleus axons decussate at mid pons levels immediately upon leaving the nucleus.
Above the level of the pons, all of the somatosensory pathways have decussated and are traveling in close proximity.
The initial higher order processing the discriminative touch and proprioception occurs exclusively within the primary somatosensory cortex. In contrast, pain information is processed in multiple cortical areas.
Symptoms: The patient exhibits decrease in pain and temperature sensations that involve the left side of his body and right side of his face (Figure 5.32). Discriminative touch, vibration and position senses are normal in these areas. Touch, vibration, position, temperature, and pain sensations are normal for the rest of the body and face.
Wallenberg's Syndrome. In the medulla, both the spinothalamic tracts and the spinal trigeminal tracts are located posteriorly in the area that normally receives blood via branches of the posterior inferior cerebella artery (PICA) (Figure 5.36). Consequently, an obstruction of the PICA blood supply to the medulla will result in analgesia and thermo-anesthesia of the contralesional body (spinothalamic tracts) and of the ipsilesional face (spinal trigeminal tract). Branches of the anterior spinal and vertebral arteries supply more anterior areas of the upper medulla. Therefore, an infarct involving the PICA blood supply will not affect the medial lemniscus or ventral trigeminal lemniscus. Consequently, discriminative touch and proprioception from the body and pain, temperature and crude touch in the contralesional half of the face will not be affected with an infarct involving PICA.
Above the level of the pons (Figure 5.11), all of the major somatosensory tracts are crossed and located in close proximity. Consequently, if the brain stem were hemisected above the pons, there would be anesthesia of the contralesional body (section of the spinothalamic tracts which decussate in the spinal cord, and the medial lemniscus, which decussates in the medulla) and contralesional face (section of the ventral trigeminal lemniscus which consists of 2° afferents of the spinal and main sensory trigeminal nuclei that decussate in the medulla and pons).
Somatosensory Cortex. Hemorrhage limited to somatosensory parietal areas produces contralesional astereognosis, baragnosis, and losses in the ability to discriminate object size and texture. Also decreased or lost on the contralesional side of the body are the ability to discriminate position and movement of body parts and the control of fine movements. The hemorrhage would not produce a total loss of pain sensation as other cortical areas are also involved in the perception of painful stimuli. For example, the cingulate gyrus in the frontal lobe and part of the insular cortex appear to be involved in the perception of, and emotional reaction to, painful stimuli (Figure 5.41).
From this chapter, you should have learned how the somatosensory system is organized from the skin, muscles and joints to the cortex. You have learned that stimulus features extracted by the somatosensory receptors are kept segregated in separate “information channels” and processed in parallel by different chains of neurons. Information coded and carried by thousands of spinal cord and cranial ganglion cells are distributed to millions of cortical neurons in the parietal lobe. The perceptions of coherent somatosensory stimuli and body image are recomposed out of these fragments of information by the simultaneous activation of large areas of cortex. You have learned how to use the somatotopic organization and the modality specificity of the different somatosensory pathways to determine the location and extent of damage to the somatosensory structures.
Most of the sensory and somatosensory modalities are primarily informative, whereas pain is a protective modality. Pain differs from the classical senses (hearing, smell, taste, touch, and vision) because it is both a discriminative sensation and a graded emotional experience associated with actual or potential tissue damage.

Pain is a submodality of somatic sensation. The word "pain" is used to describe a wide range of unpleasant sensory and emotional experiences associated with actual or potential tissue damage. Nature has made sure that pain is a signal we cannot ignore. Pain information is transmitted to the CNS via three major pathways (Figure 6.1).

Most ailments of the body cause pain. The ability to diagnose different diseases depends to a great extent on the knowledge of the different qualities and causes of pain. Sensitivity and reactivity to noxious stimuli are essential to the well-being and survival of an organism. Pain travels through redundant pathways, ensuring to inform the subject: “Get out of this situation immediately.” Without these attributes, the organism has no means to prevent or minimize tissue injury. Individuals congenitally insensitive to pain are easily injured and most of them die at an early age.

For thousands of years, physicians have tried to treat pain without knowing the details of the ways in which pain is signaled from the injured part of the body to the brain, or the ways in which any of their remedies worked. Recent discoveries about how the body detects, transmits and reacts to painful stimuli, have allowed physicians to relieve both acute and chronic pain.
Pain is termed nociceptive (nocer – to injure or to hurt in Latin), and nociceptive means sensitive to noxious stimuli. Noxious stimuli are stimuli that elicit tissue damage and activate nociceptors.

Nociceptors are sensory receptors that detect signals from damaged tissue or the threat of damage and indirectly also respond to chemicals released from the damaged tissue. Nociceptors are free (bare) nerve endings found in the skin (Figure 6.2), muscle, joints, bone and viscera. Recently, it was found that nerve endings contain transient receptor potential (TRP) channels that sense and detect damage. The TRP channels are similar to voltage-gated potassium channels or nucleotide-gated channels, having 6 transmembrane domains with a pore between domains 5 and 6. They transduce a variety of noxious stimuli into receptor potentials, which in turn initiate action potential in the pain nerve fibers. This action potential is transmitted to the spinal cord and makes a synaptic connection in lamina I and/or II. The cell bodies of nociceptors are mainly in the dorsal root and trigeminal ganglia. No nociceptors are found inside the CNS.
Nociceptors are not uniformly sensitive. They fall into several categories, depending on their responses to mechanical, thermal, and/or chemical stimulation liberated by the damage, tumor, and/or inflammation.

Skin Nociceptors. Skin nociceptors may be divided into four categories based on function. The first type is termed high threshold mechanonociceptors or specific nociceptors. These nociceptors respond only to intense mechanical stimulation such as pinching, cutting or stretching. The second type is the thermal nociceptors, which respond to the above stimuli as well as to thermal stimuli. The third type is chemical nociceptors, which respond only to chemical substances (Figure 6.2). A fourth type is known as polymodal nociceptors, which respond to high intensity stimuli such as mechanical, thermal and to chemical substances like the previous three types. A characteristic feature of nociceptors is their tendency to be sensitized by prolonged stimulation, making them respond to other sensations as well.

Joint Nociceptors. The joint capsules and ligaments contain high-threshold mechanoreceptors, polymodal nociceptors, and "silent" nociceptors. Many of the fibers innervating these endings in the joint capsule contain neuropeptides, such as substance P (SP) and calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP). Liberation of such peptides is believed to play a role in the development of inflammatory arthritis.

Visceral Nociceptors. Visceral organs contain mechanical pressure, temperature, chemical and silent nociceptors. The visceral nociceptors are scattered, with several millimeters between them, and in some organs, there are several centimeters between each nociceptor (Figure 6.3). Many of the visceral nociceptors are silent. The noxious information from visceral organs and skin are carried to the CNS in different pathways (Figures 6.3 and 6.4).
Silent Nociceptors. In the skin and deep tissues there are additional nociceptors called "silent" or "sleep" nociceptors. These receptors are normally unresponsive to noxious mechanical stimulation, but become “awakened” (responsive) to mechanical stimulation during inflammation and after tissue injury. One possible explanation of the "awakening" phenomenon is that continuous stimulation from the damaged tissue reduces the threshold of these nociceptors and causes them to begin to respond. This activation of silent nociceptors may contribute to the induction of hyperalgesia, central sensitization, and allodynia (see below). Many visceral nociceptors are silent nociceptors.

Activation of the nociceptor initiates the process by which pain is experienced, (e.g., we touch a hot stove or sustain a cut). These receptors relay information to the CNS about the intensity and location of the painful stimulus.
Nociceptors respond when a stimulus causes tissue damage, such as that resulting from cut strong mechanical pressure, extreme heat, etc. The damage of tissue results in a release of a variety of substances from lysed cells as well as from new substances synthesized at the site of the injury (Figure 6.5). Some of these substances activate the TRP channels which in turn initiate action potentials. These substances include:

Globulin and protein kinases. It has been suggested that damaged tissue releases globulin and protein kinases, which are believed to be amongst the most active pain-producing substances. Minute subcutaneous injections of globulin induce severe pain.
Arachidonic acid. Arachidonic acid is one of the chemicals released during tissue damage. It is then metabolized into prostaglandin (and cytokines). The action of the prostaglandins is mediated through a G protein, protein kinase A cascade. The prostaglandins block the potassium efflux released from nociceptors following damage, which results in additional depolarization. This makes the nociceptors more sensitive. Aspirin is an effective pain killer because it blocks the conversion of arachidonic acid to prostaglandin.
Histamine. Tissue damage stimulates the mast cells to release histamine to the surrounding area. Histamine excites the nociceptors. Minute subcutaneous injections of histamine elicit pain.
Nerve growth factor (NGF). Inflammation or tissue damage triggers the release of NGF. NGF then binds to TrkA receptors on the surfaces of nociceptors leading to their activation. Minute subcutaneous injections of NGF elicit pain.
Substance P (SP) and calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) are released by injury. Inflammation of tissue damage also results in SP and CGRP release, which excites nociceptors. Minute subcutaneous injection of substance P and CGRP elicits pain. Both peptides produce vasodilation, which results in the spread of edema around the initial damage.
Potassium - K+. Most tissue damage results in an increase in extracellular K+. There is a good correlation between pain intensity and local K+ concentration.
Serotonin (5-HT), acetylcholine (ACh), low pH (acidic) solution, and ATP. These substances are released with tissue damage. Subcutaneous injections of minute qualities of these products excite nociceptors.
Muscle spasm and lactic acid. Not only can some headaches result from muscle spasms of smooth muscle, stretching of a ligament can also elicit pain. When muscles are hyperactive or when blood flow to a muscle is blocked, lactic acid concentration increases and pain is induced. The greater the rate of tissue metabolism, the more rapidly the pain appears. Minute subcutaneous injections of lactic acid excite nociceptors.
The release of these substances sensitizes the nociceptors (C fibers) and reduces their threshold. This effect is referred to as peripheral sensitization (in contrast to central sensitization that occurs in the dorsal horn).
Within 15-30 seconds after injury, an area of several cm around the injured site shows reddening (caused by vasodilation) called a flare. This response (inflammation) becomes maximal after 5-10 minutes (Figure 6.6), and this region shows a lowered pain threshold (i.e., hyperalgesia).

Hyperalgesia. Hyperalgesia is an increased painful sensation in response to additional noxious stimuli. One explanation for hyperalgesia is that the threshold for pain in the area surrounding an inflamed or injured site is lowered. An additional explanation is that the inflammation activates silent nociceptors and/or the damage elicits ongoing nerve signals (prolong stimulation), which led to long-term changes and sensitized nociceptors. These changes contribute to an amplification of pain or hyperalgesia, as well as an increased persistence of the pain. If one pricks normal skin with a sharp probe, it will elicit sharp pain followed by reddened skin. The reddened skin is an area of hyperalgesia.

Allodynia. Allodynia is pain resulting from a stimulus that does not normally produce pain. For example, light touch to sunburned skin produces pain because nociceptors in the skin have been sensitized as a result of reducing the threshold of the silent nociceptors. Another explanation of allodynia is that when peripheral neurons are damaged, structural changes occur and the damaged neurons reroute and make connection also to sensory receptors (i.e., touch-sensitive fibers reroute and make synaptic connection into areas of the spinal cord that receive input from nociceptors).

In conclusion, the several kinds of endogenous chemicals are produced with tissue damage and inflammation. These products have excitatory effects on nociceptors. However, it is not known whether nociceptors respond directly to the noxious stimulus or indirectly by means of one or more chemical intermediaries released from the traumatized tissue.
Exposing the skin to controlled heat (produced by heating element or laser) makes it possible to measure the threshold for pain. When the temperature of the skin reaches 45 ± 1°C, subjects report pain. Non-noxious thermal (< 45°C) receptors are innervated by different types of nerve fibers than those responding to the pain. A temperature of approximately 45ºC denatures tissue protein and elicits damage in all subjects (Figure 6.7). That is, the pain threshold in all subjects is about the same. However, the response to pain is different among people.
Pain is measured by the degree of pain intensity. Different degrees of pain intensity are defined as Just Noticeable Differences (JND). There are 22 JND for pain elicited by heat to the skin (Figure 6.8A). This discrimination is possible because the discharge frequency of the nociceptors increases with increasing skin temperature (Figure 6.8B). Thus, nociceptors also supply information on the stimulus intensity (intensity coding) in addition to the injury location.
The cell bodies of the primary afferent pain neurons from the body, face, and head are located in the dorsal root ganglia (DRG) and in the trigeminal ganglia respectively. Some of these cell bodies give rise to myelinated axons (A delta fibers), and others give rise to unmyelinated axons (C fibers). The free nerve endings arise from both A delta fibers and the unmyelinated C fibers, which are scattered together (Figure 6.9).
A delta fibers (group III fibers) are 2-5 mm in diameter, myelinated, have a fast conduction velocity (5-40 meters/sec), and carry information mainly from the nociceptive-mechanical or mechanothermal-specific nociceptors. Their receptive fields are small. Therefore, they provide precise localization of pain.
C fibers (group IV fibers) are 0.4-1.2 mm in diameter, unmyelinated, have a slow conduction velocity (0.5-2.0 meters/sec), and are activated by a variety of high-intensity mechanical, chemical and thermal stimulation and carry information from polymodal nociceptors. C-fibers comprise about 70% of all the fibers carrying noxious input. Two classes of C-fibers have been identified. The receptive field of these neurons is large and, therefore, less precise for pain localization.
Upon entering the spinal cord, the pain fibers bifurcate and ascend and descend to several segments, forming part of the tract of Lissauer before synapsing on neurons on Rexed layers I to II. In general, nociceptors responding to noxious stimuli transmit the information to the CNS via A delta fibers, which make synaptic connections to neurons in Rexed layer I (nucleus posterior marginalis). The nociceptors responding to chemical or thermal stimuli (i.e., the polymodal nociceptors) carry their activity mainly by C unmyelinated fibers. One class of C fibers terminates in Rexed layer I, and the second class terminates in Rexed layer II (substantia gelatinosa). These fibers release substance P, glutamate, aspartate calcitonin gene related peptide (CGRP), vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP), and nitric oxide.
Two sequential pain sensations in short time intervals is the result of sudden painful stimulation. The first one is immediately after the damage. It is followed several seconds later with additional pain sensation. These two separate sensations are several seconds apart because a fast transmitting information sensation is carried via A delta fibers and is followed several seconds later with slow transmitting pain information carried via C fibers. This phenomenon is known as “double pain sensation” (Figure 6.9).

Two experimental procedures were used to verify which information is carried by which fibers.

Externally applied pressure, such as compression of the skin above a nerve, first blocks the myelinated A delta fibers, while C fibers continue to conduct action potentials and allow the slow conducting pain to be carried.
A low dose of local anesthesia applied to peripheral nerves blocks the unmyelinated C fibers before the myelinated A delta fibers. Under this condition, the slow conducting pain information is blocked, and only the fast conducting pain information by A delta fibers is carried to the CNS. This experiment provides additional evidence that two different types of nerve fibers carry noxious information.
The synaptic terminals of the axons of the dorsal root ganglion, which carry noxious information arriving to Rexed layers I and II (Figure 6.10), release neurochemical agents such as substance P (SP), glutamate, aspartate, vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP), cholecystokinin (CCK), somatostatin, calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), galanin, and other agents. These agents activate the nocineurons. It was shown that when SP and CGRP are applied locally within the spinal cord dorsal horn, glutamate is released. The release of glutamate excites the nocineurons. Furthermore, SP receptors (neurokinin receptors) and NMDA receptors (glutamate) interact which result that the NMDA receptors will become more sensitive to glutamate, which results in central sensitization. The functions of these peptides are largely unknown but they presumably mediate slow, modulatory synaptic actions in the dorsal horn neurons. The neuropeptides are always co-localized with other "classical" neurotransmitters.

There are four general types of nocineurons in the spinal cord (Figure 6.10):

High threshold mechanoreceptor neurons or nociceptive specific neurons. These neurons are excited only by noxious cutaneous and/or visceral stimuli. The nociceptive afferent fibers release glutamate and different neuropeptides to activate the dorsal horn neurons.
Chemical nociceptor neurons are excited by chemical or thermal noxious stimulus in the skin or in visceral organs.
Thermal nociceptor neurons are excited by chemical or thermal noxious stimulus in the skin or in visceral organs.
Polymodal-nociceptive neurons or multi, or wide dynamic range nociceptive neurons. These neurons are excited by both noxious and non-noxious cutaneous and/or visceral stimuli (polymodal nociceptive neurons). These neurons are activated by a variety of noxious stimuli (mechanical, thermal, chemical, etc.) and respond incrementally to increasing intensity of the stimuli.
Rexed lamina I contains a higher proportion of nociceptive specific neurons, whereas Rexed lamina II contains predominantly multi-receptive wide dynamic range neurons. The nociceptive-specific neurons alert the subject when a stimulus is noxious, and the multi-receptive neurons provide the subject with information about the parameters of the noxious stimulus. In general, C fibers release neuropeptides such as substance P whereas the A delta fibers release glutamate.
Pain has been classified into three major types:

Pricking pain. Pain caused by a needle, pin prick, skin cut, etc. - elicits a sharp, pricking quality, stinging pain sensation carried fast by the A delta fibers. The pain is precisely localized and of short duration. Pricking pain is also called fast pain, first pain or sensory pain. Pricking pain is present in all individuals and is a useful and necessary component of our sensory repertoire. Without this type of protective pain sensation, everyday life would be difficult. Pricking pain arises mainly from the skin, and carried mainly by A delta fibers which permits discrimination (i.e., permits the subject to localize the pain).
Burning pain or soreness pain. Pain caused by inflammation, burned skin, etc., is carried by the C fibers (slowly conducted pain nerve fibers). This type of pain is a more diffuse, slower to onset, and longer in duration. It is an annoying pain and intolerable pain, which is not distinctly localized. Like pricking pain, burning pain arises mainly from the skin. It is carried by the paleospinothalamic tract. (The old primitive transmission system for diffuse pain which does not permit exact localization.)
Aching pain is a sore pain. This pain arises mainly from the viscera and somatic deep structures. Aching pain is not distinctly localized and is an annoying and intolerable pain. Aching pain is carried by the C fibers from the deep structures to the spinal cord.
Sensitivity and reactivity to noxious stimuli are essential to the well-being and survival of an organism. Without these attributes, the organism has no means to prevent or minimize tissue injury. Given the importance of pain sensation, it is not surprising that the central and peripheral neuronal pathways that subserve the transmission of nociceptive information and the pathway that transmits and modulates this somatosensory transmission are essential to understanding this somatosensory modality. Pain travels through “redundant” pathways, ensuring to inform the subject to "Get out of this situation immediately."
The ascending pathways that mediate pain consist of three different tracts: the neospinothalamic tract, the paleospinothalamic tract and the archispinothalamic tract. The first-order neurons are located in the dorsal root ganglion (DRG) for all three pathways. Each pain tract originates in different spinal cord regions and ascends to terminate in different areas in the CNS.
The neospinothalamic tract has few synapses and constitutes the classical lateral spinothalamic tract (LST) (Figure 7.1). The first-order nociceptive neurons (in the DRG) make synaptic connections in Rexed layer I neurons (marginal zone). Axons from layer I neurons decussate in the anterior white commissure, at approximately the same level they enter the cord, and ascend in the contralateral anterolateral quadrant. Most of the pain fibers from the lower extremity and the body below the neck terminate in the ventroposterolateral (VPL) nucleus and ventroposteroinferior (VPI) nucleus of the thalamus, which serves as a relay station that sends the signals to the primary cortex. The VPL is thought to mainly be concerned with discriminatThe first-order nociceptive neurons from the head, face and intraoral structures have somata in the trigeminal ganglion (Figure 7.2). Trigeminal fibers enter the pons, descend to the medulla and make synaptic connections in the spinal trigeminal nucleus, cross the midline and ascend as trigeminothalamic tract (or trigeminal lemniscus, Figure 7.2). The A delta fibers terminate in the ventroposteromedial (VPM) thalamus, and the C fibers terminate in the parafasciculus (PF) and centromedian (CM) thalamus (PF-CM complex). The PF-CM complex is located within the intralaminar thalamus and are known also as intralaminar (IL) nuclei. All of the neospinothalamic fibers terminating in VPL and VPM are somatotopically oriented and from there send axons that synapse on the primary somatosensory cortex (SC I - Brodman areas 1 & 2). This pathway is responsible for the immediate awareness of a painful sensation and for awareness of the exact location of the painful stimulus.
The paleospinothalamic tract is phylogenetically old. The majority of the first-order nociceptive neurons make synaptic connections in Rexed layer II (substantia gelatinosa) and the second-order neurons make synaptic connections in laminae IV-VIII. The second-order neurons also receive input from mechanoreceptors and thermoreceptors. The nerve cells that furnish the paleospinothalamic tract are multireceptive or wide dynamic range nociceptors. Most of their axons cross and ascend in the spinal cord primarily in the anterior region and thus called the anterior spinal thalamic tract (AST). These fibers contain several tracts. Each of them makes a synaptic connection in different locations: 1) in the mesencephalic reticular formation (MFR) and in the periaqueductal gray (PAG), and they are also called spinoreticular tract; 2) in the tectum, and these fibers are known as the spinotectal or spinomedullary tract; 3) in the PF-CM complex (IL) and they are known as the spinothalamic tract (Figure 7.3). The above three fiber tracts are known also as the paleospinothalamic tract. The innervation of these three tracts is bilateral because some of the ascending fibers do not cross to the opposite side of the cord. From the PF and CM complex, these fibers synapse bilaterally in the somatosensory cortex (SC II-Brodman area 3). The paleospinothalamic pathway also activates brain stem nuclei which are the origin of descending pain suppression pathway regulating noxious input at the spinal cord level (see next chapter).
The multisynaptic tracts which course via the reticular formation also project to the PF-CM (IL) complex. There are extensive connections between the IL and the limbic areas such as the cingulate gyrus and the insular cortex, which is thought to be involved in processing the emotional components of pain. That is to say, the insular cortex integrates the sensory input with the cortical cognitive components to elicit the response to the sensation. The limbic structures, in turn, project to the hypothalamus and initiate visceral responses to pain. The intralaminar nuclei also projects to the frontal cortex, which in turn projects to the limbic structures where the emotional response to pain is mediated.
The archispinothalamic tract is a multisynaptic diffuse tract or pathway and is phylogenetically the oldest tract that carries noxious information. The first-order nociceptive neurons make synaptic connections in Rexed layer II (substantia gelatinosa) and ascend to laminae IV to VII. From lamina IV to VII, fibers ascend and descend in the spinal cord via the multisynaptic propriospinal pathway (Figure 7.4) surrounding the grey matter to synapse with cells in the MRF-PAG area. Further multisynaptic diffuse pathways ascend to the intralaminar (IL) areas of the thalamus (i.e., PF-CM complex) and also send collaterals to the hypothalamus and to the limbic system nuclei. These fibers mediate visceral, emotional and autonomic reactions to pain.
Figure 7,5 summarizes the three major spinal thalamic pathways. Information about bodily events is conveyed by primary sensory fibers to higher brain centers through the dorsal column medial lemniscal pathways. This route is considered a "touch pathway," separate from the spinal thalamic pathways. However, recent reports indicate that the dorsal column can also carry noxious information from the viscera and widespread skin regions.
Somatic pain can be classified as either: 1) cutaneous, superficial or peripheral pain and 2) deep pain.

Cutaneous, Superficial or Peripheral Pain. Pain that arises from the skin and muscles or peripheral nerves themselves. In general, this pain has two components, the initial response (a) followed by later response (b). These signals are transmitted via different pathway.
Pricking pain reaches the CNS via neospinothalamic tract (i.e., LST) to the VPL (or VPM) and to the SCI.
Burning and soreness pain resulting from tissue damage reaches the CNS via the paleospinothalamic tract (AST) and archispinothalamic tract to brain stem nuclei and to PF-CM complex, etc.
Deep pain. This pain arises from joint receptors tendons and fascia (i.e., deep structures). The quality of deep pain is dull, aching or burning. Deep pain is accompanied by a definite autonomic response associated with sweating and nausea, changes in blood pressure and heart rate. Somatic deep pain reaches the CNS mainly via the paleospinothalamic (Figure 7.3) and archispinothalamic tract (Figure 7.4).
Reaction to Somatic Pain. Sudden, unexpected damage to the skin is followed by three responses:

Startle response. This is a complex psychosomatic response to a sudden unexpected stimulus which includes: A flexion reflex, postural readjustment and orientation of the head and eyes to examine the damaged area.
Autonomic response. This response includes: NE and E release, ACTH and/or cortisol release, and vasoconstriction and piloerection.
Behavioral response. This response includes: Vocalization, rubbing designed to diminish pain, learning to respond to sudden pain and psychosomatic pain.
In the visceral organs, nociceptors respond to mechanical stimulation such as pressure, tissue damage, and chemical stimulation.

Most noxious information carried by visceral afferents does not give rise to conscious sensation. Visceral pain is diffuse, less precisely graded and typically accompanied by slowing of the heart, lowered blood pressure, cold sweats and nausea. It conveys also hunger, thirst, electrolyte balance, irregulation in the respiratory and circulatory systems. Many of these signals reach the CNS bilaterally (Figure 7.6) by the following three channels.
In the visceral organs, free nerve endings are scattered, and any stimulus that excites these nerve endings causes visceral pain (Figure 7.6). Such stimuli include spasm of the smooth muscle in a hollow viscus, or distention or stretching of the ligament, such as a stone blocking the ureter or the gall ducts. Stretching of the tissues such as intestinal obstruction can also provoke visceral pain. Visceral pain is also caused by chemical means as a result of gastrointestinal lesions, and tumors as well as thrombosis of an artery. In many cases, visceral pain is not localized to the site of its cause, rather in a distant site.
Stroke or occlusion in the thalamogeniculate artery (a branch of the posterior cerebral artery), which supplies the lateroposterior half of the thalamus, can result in a thalamic lesion, which is often accompanied by neurologic conditions several months after the initial event. The condition is associated with a devastating intracranial pain in the contralateral side of the thalamic lesion and sensory loss. In some cases, severe facial pain is experienced without any sensory loss. The pain resulting from an intracranial lesion is also termed "central pain."

Lesions in the spinothalamic tract and its targets of termination as well as local manifestations of diencephalic lesions are usually complex. They can induce alteration of sensory, motor and endocrine components because of the functional diversity of the thalamus. Subjects with this syndrome experience spontaneous aching and burning pain in body regions where sensory stimuli normally do not lead to pain. Because the brain and the spinal cord do not contain nociceptors, the pathological process presumably directly stimulates nociceptive pathways, or it prevents the activation of the pain suppression pathways. This condition is known also as thalamic pain syndrome or Dejerive-Roussy syndrome.
Neuropathic pain is a sharp, shooting and devastating pain. It is a persistent pain that arises from functional changes occurring in the CNS secondary to peripheral nerve injury. Once the nerve is damaged, the damaged nerve elicits sustained activation of nociceptors and/or nociceptive afferents. The neuropathic pain is due to an abnormal activation of the nociceptive system without specifically stimulating the nociceptors. Neuroplastic changes occurring in the CNS secondary to the afferent barrage are believed to culminate in CNS neuronal hyperexcitability. Many scientists suggest that “sensitization” of the nervous system following injury is a factor in neuropathic pain. Neuropathic pain can usually be controlled by anti-inflammatory drugs and opioids. In some cases, such as in diabetics, AIDS, cancer, etc., no treatment or relief is available to neuropathic pain. Neuropathic pain should not be confused with neurogenic pain, a term used to describe pain resulting from injury to a peripheral nerve but without necessarily implying any neuropathy.
Psychic reaction to pain includes all the well-known responses to pain such as anguish, anxiety, crying, depression, nausea and excess muscular excitability through the body. These reactions vary tremendously from one person to another following a comparable degree of pain stimuli. The sensation of pain can be influenced by emotions, past experiences and suggestions. The same stimulus can elicit different responses in different subjects under the same conditions.

Recently, Positron Emission Tomography (PET) has been used to study pain pathways and psychosomatic pain centers. For example, volunteers had their hands dipped in hot water (50° C) while they were conscious. They then dipped their hand again in hot water (50° C) after a post-hypnotic suggestion that the pain would be either more or less unpleasant than the first time. The PET scans of their brains showed that activity in the anterior cingulate cortex changed in accordance with how unpleasant they expected the pain to be. However, the intensity in the primary somatosensory cortex remained constant (i.e., the emotional component of pain is independent of its sensation).
Referred pain is a painful sensation at a site other than the injured one. The pain is not localized to the site of its cause (visceral organ) but instead is localized to a distant site. One possible exception is that the axons carry pain information from the viscera enter into the spinal cord by the same route as the cutaneous pain sensation axons. Within the spinal cord there is a convergence of the information on the same nocineurons. This convergence gives rise to the phenomenon of referred pain. For example, pain associated with angina pectoris, or myocardial infarction is referred to the left chest, left shoulder, and upper left arm (Figure 7.7). Pain resulting from distention of the colon is referred to the periumbilical area (Figures 7.8).
The following are some hypothesis to explain referred pain

Common dermatome hypothesis. When pain is referred, it is usually to a structure that developed from the same embryonic segment or dermatome as the structure in which the pain originates. Radiating pain down the left arm is the result of a myocardial infarction (Figure 7.7), or pain originating from the shoulder (dermatomes 3-5).
Convergence and facilitation theories (Figure 7.9). Inputs from visceral and skin receptors converge on the same spinal cord neuron (i.e., viscerosomatic neurons). Therefore, visceral pain is referred to skin area because the nociceptors' terminals from the viscera terminate in the spinal cord on the same neurons that receive input from the skin.
Facilitation or irritable focus. Pain impulses from the viscera alone are unable to pass directly from spinal cord neurons to the brain, but create an "irritable focus". When visceral and skin impulses arrive together, the information transmitted to higher centers and the brain interprets the pain as being from the skin (Figure 7.10).
Learned phenomenon. Visceral information arrives in the CNS. However, the brain interprets that the impulses originate from the site of a previous surgical operation, trauma or localized pathologic process.
Phantom or illusory pain is the experience of pain without any signals from nociceptors. It occurs in a subject with previous injuries such as amputation in which the dorsal roots are literally absent from the cord. Even though no sensory signals can enter the cord, the subject often feels extreme pain in the denervated parts of the body. For example, an amputee will often apparently feel pain in a part of his body that has been removed. The phenomenon of phantom limb pain is a common experience after a limb has been amputated or its sensory roots have been destroyed in which the pain is felt in a part of the body that no longer exists. Pain from an amputated arm is referred to the viscera as a result of disruption to the “balance” between different peripheral inputs to the dorsal horn. A complete break of the spinal cord also often leads to a phantom body pain below the level of the break. The source of phantom pain is complex and not well understood. It has been suggested that there may be abnormal discharges 1) from the remaining cut ends of nerves which grow into nodules called neuromas, 2) from overactive spinal neurons, 3) from abnormal flow of signals through the somatosensory cortex, or 4) from burst-firing neurons in the thalamus.
Acute pain arises from activation of nociceptors for a limited time and is not associated with significant tissue damage (e.g., a pin prick).
Chronic pain is prolonged pain lasting for months or longer that arises from tissue injury, inflammation, nerve damage, tumor growth, lesion or occlusion of blood vessels. Chronic or inflammatory pain can sensitize (see "Sensitization" below) the nervous system, evoking chemical, functional, and even structural changes that serve to “prime the pain-processing pump”. Chronic pain, such as lower back pain, rheumatoid and osteoarthritis, and headache (see "Headaches" below) may result from constant inflammatory activity which activates G proteins. In some cases, the pain persists long after the injury heals, but there is no treatment that will eliminate the pain.
One possible explanation for chronic pain is a phenomenon called sensitization. Following continuation and prolong noxious stimulation, nearby silent nociceptive neurons that previously were unresponsive to stimulation, now become responsive. In addition, some of the chemicals produced and released at the injured site also alter the physiological properties of nociceptors. The nociceptors begin to initiate pain signals spontaneously, which cause chronic pain. In addition, weak stimuli, such as a light touch that previously had no effect on these nociceptors, will further activate the nociceptors which result in severe pain signals. This phenomenon is referred to as “peripheral sensitization.” The outcome of peripheral sensitization results in a greater and more persistent barrage of nerve impulses firing in the CNS. The persistent barrage of nerve impulses results in long-term changes in nerve cell activity at the level of the spinal cord and higher centers in the brain. This phenomena is referred to as “central sensitization”. It appears that peripheral and central sensitization persists after the injury apparently has healed. The sensitization of nociceptive neurons after injury results from the release of different chemicals from the damaged area. It is known that substance P and calcitonin gene-related peptides are released from peripheral nerve ending which stimulate most cells to release algesic substances which further potentiates the pain from the injury. In contrast, central sensitization resulting from severe and persistent injury which cause prolonged release of glutamate on nociceptive dorsal horn cells, this constant glutamate release via G protein dependent phosphorylation cascades results in opening of postsynaptic ion channels gated by the NMDA receptors. This phenomenon is also termed "wind up." This activation produces hyperexcitability of the dorsal horn cells and causes "central sensitization." Pain experts now agree that treating chronic pain early and aggressively yields the best results and prevents patients from developing physical and psychological conditions that could worsen the pain.
Fibromyalgia is characterized by widespread chronic pain throughout the body, including fatigue, anxiety and depression. It is now believed that it has a genetic component which tends to run in families.
Because of the importance of warning signals of dangerous circumstances, several nociception pathways are involved to transmitting these signals and some of them are redundant.

The neospinothalamic tract conducts fast pain (via A delta fibers) and provides information of the exact location of the noxious stimulus, and the multisynaptic paleospinothalamic and archispinothalamic tracts conduct slow pain (via C fibers), a pain which is poorly localized in nature. (Figure 7.5)

Pain activates many brain areas, which link sensation, perception, emotion, memory and motor reaction. Therefore, many pain clinics target their treatments to block the perception of pain using psychosomatic means of treatments such as biofeedback, hypnosis, physical therapy, electrical stimulation, and acupuncture-multimodal treatment.
Most, if not all, ailments of the body cause pain. Pain is interpreted and perceived in the brain. Pain is modulated by two primary types of drugs that work on the brain: analgesics and anesthetics. The term analgesic refers to a drug that relieves pain without loss of consciousness. The term central anesthesia refers to a drug that depresses the CNS. It is characterized by the absence of all perception of sensory modalities, including loss of consciousness without loss of vital functions.
The most effective clinically used drugs for producing temporary analgesia and relief from pain are the opioid family, which includes morphine, and heroin. There are currently no other effective pain therapeutic alternatives to opiates. Several side effects resulting from opiate use include tolerance and drug dependence (addiction). In general, these drugs modulate the incoming pain information in the spinal and central sites, as well as relieve pain temporarily, and are also known as opiate producing analgesia (OA). Opiate antagonist is a drug that antagonizes the opioid effects, such as naloxone or naltrexone, etc. They are competitive antagonists of opiate receptors. The brain has a neuronal circuit and endogenous substances to modulate pain.
Opioidergic neurotransmission is found throughout the brain and spinal cord and appears to influence many CNS functions, including nociception, cardiovascular functions, thermoregulation, respiration, neuroendocrine functions, neuroimmune functions, food intake, sexual activity, aggressive locomotor behavior as well as learning and memory. Opioids exert marked effects on mood and motivation and produce euphoria.

Three classes of opioid receptors have been identified: μ-mu, δ-delta and κ-kappa. All three classes are widely distributed in the brain. The genes encoding each one of them have been cloned and found to be members of the G protein receptors. Moreover, three major classes of endogenous opioid peptides that interact with the above opiate receptors have been recognized in the CNS: β-endorphins, enkephalins and the dynorphins. These three opioid peptides are derived from a large protein precursor by three different genes: the proopiomelanocortin (POMC) gene, the proenkephalin gene and the prodynorphin gene. The opioid peptides modulate nociceptive input in two ways: 1) block neurotransmitter release by inhibiting Ca2+ influx into the presynaptic terminal, or 2) open potassium channels, which hyperpolarizes neurons and inhibits spike activity. They act on various receptors in the brain and spinal cord. Enkephalins are considered the putative ligands for the δ receptors, β endorphins for the μ-receptors, and dynorphins for the κ receptors. The various types of opioid receptors are distributed differently within the central and peripheral nervous system. There is evidence for functional differences in these receptors in various structures. This explains why many unwanted side effects occur following opiate treatments. For example, mu (μ) receptors are widespread in the brain stem parabrachial nuclei, a respiratory center and inhibition of these neurons elicits respiratory depression.

Central or peripheral terminals of nociceptive afferent fibers contain opiate receptors where exogenous and endogenous opioids could act to modulate the ability to transmit nociceptive information. Moreover, high densities of opiate receptors are found in periaqueductal gray (PAG), nucleus raphe magnus (NRM), and dorsal raphe (DR) in the rostral ventral medulla, in the spinal cord, caudate nucleus (CN), septal nucleus, hypothalamus, habenula and hippocampus. Additional details on opiate receptors is provided later in this lecture.

Systemically administered opioids at analgesic doses activate spinal and supraspinal mechanisms via μ, δ, and κ type opioid receptors and modulate pain signals.
For many years it was suggested that somewhere in the CNS there is a circuit that can modulate incoming pain information. The gate control theory and the ascending/descending pain transmission system are two suggestions of such a circuit.
The first pain modulatory mechanism called the "Gate Control" theory was proposed by Melzack and Wall in the mid 1960s. The concept of the gate control theory is that non-painful input closes the gates to painful input, which results in prevention of the pain sensation from traveling to the CNS (i.e., non-noxious input [stimulation] suppresses pain).
The theory suggests that collaterals of the large sensory fibers carrying cutaneous sensory input activate inhibitory interneurons, which inhibit (modulate) pain transmission information carried by the pain fibers. Non-noxious input suppresses pain, or sensory input “closes the gate” to noxious input (Figure 8.1). The gate theory predicts that at the spinal cord level, non-noxious stimulation will produce presynaptic inhibition on dorsal root nociceptor fibers that synapse on nociceptors spinal neurons (T), and this presynaptic inhibition will block incoming noxious information from reaching the CNS (i.e., will close the gate to incoming noxious information).

The gate theory was the rationale for the idea behind the production and the use of transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) for pain relief. To be effective, the TENS unit produces two different current frequencies below the pain threshold that can be tolerated by the patient. This procedure has partial success in pain therapy.
Evidence for an intrinsic analgesia system was demonstrated by intracranial electrical stimulation of certain discrete brain sites. These areas are the periaqueductal gray (PAG) and nucleus raphe magnus (NRM), dorsal raphe (DR), caudate nucleus (CN), septal nucleus (Spt) and other nuclei. Such stimulation inhibits pain, (i.e., producing analgesia without behavioral suppression), while the touch, pressure and temperature sensation remain intact. SPA is more pronounced and lasts a longer time after stimulation in humans than in experimental animals. Moreover, during SPA, the subjects still respond to nonpainful stimuli such as touch and temperature within the circumscribed area of analgesia. The most effective CNS sites for SPA are the PAG and the raphe nuclei (RN).
Electrical stimulation of PAG or NRM inhibits spinal thalamic cells, (i.e. spinal neurons that project monosynaptically to the thalamus) in laminae I, II and V so that the noxious information from the nociceptors are modulated at the spinal cord level. PAG has neuronal connections to NRM.

The action of the PAG most likely occurs by activation of the descending pathway from NRM and probably also by activation of ascending connections acting on higher subcortical levels of the CNS. Moreover, electrical stimulation of PAG or NRM produces behavioral analgesia, (i.e., stimulation produced analgesia, see Figure 8.2). Stimulation produced analgesia (SPA) elicits release of endorphin and is blocked by the opiate antagonist naloxone.

During PAG and/or RN stimulation, serotonin (5-HT) is also released from ascending and descending axons in subcortical nuclei, in spinal trigeminal nuclei and in the spinal cord. This release of 5-HT modulates pain transmission by inhibiting incoming sensory activity. Depletion of 5-HT by electrical lesion of the raphe nuclei or by a neurotoxic lesion produced by local injection of a chemical agent like parachlorophenylalanine (PCPA) results in blocking the ability of both opiate (intracranial and systemic) and electrical stimulation to produce analgesia.
To verify whether the electrical stimulation produced analgesia via the release of opiate and serotonin, the area was locally microinjected with morphine or 5-HT. These microinjections indeed produce analgesia (Figure 8.3). These procedures also provide a method of identifying brain regions associated with pain suppression and help to produce a map of pain centers. The most effective method of producing opiate analgesia (OA) is by intracerebral injection of morphine into the PAG.

The PAG and RN and other brain structures where analgesia is produced are also rich in opiate receptors. Intracerebral opioid administration produced analgesia and SPA can be blocked by either systemic or by local microinjections of naloxone, the morphine antagonist, into the PAG or RN. Therefore, it has been suggested that the two (OA and SPA) operate by a common mechanism.

If OA and SPA act through the same intrinsic system, then the hypothesis that opiates activate a pain-suppression mechanism is more likely. In fact, present evidence indicates that microinjections of an opiate into the PAG activate an efferent brainstem system that suppresses pain transmission at segmental (spinal cord) levels (See Figure 8.3). These observations indicate that analgesia elicited from the PAG requires a descending pathway to the spinal cord.
The primary ascending pain fibers (the A δ and C fibers) reach the dorsal horn of the spinal cord from peripheral sites to innervate the nociceptor neurons in Rexed laminae I & II. Cells from Rexed lamina II make synaptic connections in Rexed layers IV to VII. Cells, especially in laminae I and VII of the dorsal horn, give rise to ascending spinothalamic tracts. At the spinal level, opiate receptors are located at the presynaptic ends of the nocineurons and at the interneural level layers IV to VII in the dorsal horn. Activation of opiate receptors at the interneuronal level produces hyperpolarization of the neurons, which result in the inhibition of firing and the release of substance P, a neurotransmitter involved in pain transmission, thereby blocking pain transmission. The circuit that consists of the periaqueductal gray (PAG) matter in the upper brain stem, the locus coeruleus (LC), the nucleus raphe magnus (NRM) and the nucleus reticularis gigantocellularis (Rgc) contributes to the descending pain suppression pathway, which inhibits incoming pain information at the spinal cord level.

As mentioned previously, opioids interact with the opiate receptors at different CNS levels. These opiate receptors are the normal target sites for neurotransmitters and endogenous opiates such as the endorphins and enkephalins. As a result of binding at the receptor in subcortical sites, secondary changes which lead to a change in the electrophysiological properties of these neurons and modulation of the ascending pain information.
What activates the PAG to exert its effects? It was found that noxious stimulation excites neurons in the nucleus reticularis gigantocellularis (RGC). The nucleus Rgc innervates both the PAG and NRM. The PAG sends axons to NRM, and neurons in NRM send their axons to the spinal cord. Moreover, bilateral dorsolateral funiculus (DLF) lesions (DLFX) block the analgesia produced by both electrical stimulation and by microinjection of opiates directly into the PAG and NRM, but they only attenuate the systemic analgesic effects of opiates (Figure 8.4). These observations support the hypothesis that discrete descending pathways in the DLF are necessary for both OA and SPA.
The DLF is comprised of fibers originating from several brainstem nuclei, which are serotonergic (5-HT) from neurons located within the nucleus raphe magnus (NRM); dopaminergic neurons originating from ventral tegmental area (VTA) and adrenergic neurons originating from the locus coeruleus (LC). These descending fibers suppress noxious input at the nociceptive spinal cord neurons in laminae I, II, and V.

Opiate receptors have also been found in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord, mainly in Rexed laminae I, II, and V, and these spinal opiate receptors mediate inhibitory effects on dorsal horn neurons transmitting nociceptive information. The action of morphine appears to be exerted both in the spinal cord and brainstem nuclei (i.e., PAG and NRM). Systemic morphine acts on both brain stem and spinal cord opiate receptors to produce analgesia. Morphine binds the brainstem opiate receptors, which activates the brainstem descending serotonergic pathway to spinal cord (i.e., the DLF), and they have an opioid-mediated synapse at the level of the spinal cord.

This observation suggests that noxious stimuli (rather than non-noxious stimulus - see Gate Theory) are critical for activation of the descending pain modulation circuit (i.e., pain suppresses pain via the descending DLF pathway).

In addition, there are ascending connections from the PAG and raphe nuclei to PF-CM complex. These thalamic areas are part of the ascending pain modulation at the diencephalon level.
Analgesia may be produced in certain stressful situations. Exposure to a variety of painful or stressful events produces an analgesic reaction. This phenomenon is called stress induced analgesia (SIA). SIA has been thought to provide insight into the psychological and physiological factors that activate endogenous pain control and opiate systems. For example, soldiers wounded in battle or athletes injured in sports events sometimes report that they do not feel pain during the battle or game; however, they will experience the pain later after the battle or game has ended. It has been demonstrated (in animals) that electrical shocks cause stress-induced analgesia. Based on these experiments, it is assumed that the stress the soldiers and the athletes experienced suppressed the pain which they would later experience.

It has been suggested that endogenous opiates are released in response to stress and inhibit pain by activating the midbrain descending system. Moreover, some SIA exhibited cross tolerance with opiate analgesia, which indicates that this SIA is mediated via opiate receptors. Experiments using different parameters of electrical shock stimulation demonstrate that such stress produces analgesia and some of these stresses that produce analgesia could be blocked by the opioid antagonist naloxone, whereas others were not blocked by naloxone. These observations lead to the conclusion that both opiate and non-opiate forms of SIA exist.

The modulation of pain by electrical brain stimulation results from the activation of descending inhibitory fibers, which modulate (block) the input and output of laminae I, II, V and VII neurons. The route from the PAG to the spinal cord is not direct. It appears to involve a link with the 5-HT-rich raphe nuclei, as well as norepinephrine (NE) from the locus coeruleus (LC) and dopamine (DA) from the ventral tegmental area (VTA). Axons from the raphe nuclei, locus coeruleus and VTA project to the spinal cord dorsal horn by way of the DLF to terminate in lamina I, II and IV to VII (i.e., stimulation of NRM, VTA and LC inhibits the neuronal activity of lamina I, II and IV to VII neurons).

Opioid and serotonergic antagonists reverse both local opiate analgesia and brain-stimulation produced analgesia. This suggests that OA and SPA are produced via the same descending inhibitory system.

In conclusion, in the CNS, much of the information from the nociceptive afferent fibers results from excitatory discharges of multireceptive neurons. The pain information in the CNS is controlled by ascending and descending inhibitory systems, using endogenous opioids, or other endogenous substances like serotonin as inhibitory mediators. In addition, a powerful inhibition of pain-related information occurs in the spinal cord. These inhibitory systems can be activated by brain stimulation, intracerebral microinjection of morphine, and peripheral nerve stimulation. Centrally acting analgesic drugs activate these inhibitory control systems. However, pain is a complex perception that is influenced also by prior experience and by the context within which the noxious stimulus occurs. This sensation is also influenced by emotional state. Therefore, the response to pain varies from subject to subject.
An appreciation of the flavor of foods requires the diverse interaction of several sensory systems. Taste and smell are the principal systems for distinguishing flavors. However, tactile, thermal, and nociceptive sensory input from the oral mucosa contributes to food quality. Saliva also is an important factor in maintaining acuity of taste receptor cells (Figure 9.1). Its mechanisms of action include; acting as a solvent for polar solutes, transporting solutes to the taste receptors, buffering action for acidic foods and reparative action on the lingual epithelium.
Recent technical advances in neurophysiology have made it possible to identify the physiological mechanisms of signal transduction for the detection and discrimination of various taste stimuli by the taste receptor cells.
Taste buds are located on papillae and distributed on the surface of the tongue. Taste buds are also found on the oral mucosa of the palate and epiglottis. These pear-shaped structures contain about 80 cells arranged around a central taste pore (Figure 9.2).

Taste receptor cells are spindle shaped, modified neuro-epithelial cells that extend from the base to the apex of the taste buds. Voltage-gated channel proteins for Na+, K+ & Ca2+ are present in the plasma membrane with the K+-gated channel proteins located in larger numbers on the apical membrane of the taste cells. Synaptic vesicles are present near the apex and the basal region in many taste cells. Microvilli from each taste cell project into the taste pore which communicate with the dissolved solutes on the surface of the tongue. These receptor cells are innervated by afferent nerve fibers penetrating the basal lamina. The nerve fibers branch extensively and receive synaptic input from the taste receptor cells. A group of non-receptor columnar cells and basal cells are present within taste buds. The basal cells migrate from adjacent lingual epithelium into the buds and differentiate into taste receptor cells which are replaced about every 9-10 days.
Taste solutes are transported to the taste pore and diffuse through the fluid layer to make contact with membrane receptor proteins on the microvilli and apical membrane. Taste sensitivity is dependent upon the concentration of the taste molecules as well as their solubility in saliva. Many bitter tasting hydrophobic solutes interact with an odorant binding protein produced by von Ebner’s glands in the posterior region of the tongue.
Taste sensation can be evoked by many diverse taste solutes. The pattern of membrane potential change include depolarization, depolarization followed by hyperpolarization, or only hyperpolarization. Action potentials in the taste receptor cells lead to an increase Ca2+ influx through voltage-gated membrane channels with the release of Ca2+ from intracellular stores. In response to this cation, neurotransmitter is released, which produces synaptic potentials in the dendrites of the sensory nerves and action potentials in afferent nerve fibers (Figure 9.3).
The taste of salts is mediated by Na+ ions which do not interact with a membrane receptor but diffuse through a Na+ channel located in the microvilli and apical membrane. Anions such as Cl- contribute to the salty taste, but anions are transported into these cells by a paracellular route. The influx of these ions of salt evokes a depolarization in the apical membrane (Figure 9.3).
The hydrogen proton of acids and sour foods can influx through the Na+ channels, or through a proton transport membrane protein (Figure 9.4). Some acids block the efflux of K+ at the microvilli. The resulting influx of protons or a reduction in K+ conductance will initiate receptor potentials in response to the quality of sour tastes.
Sweet tasting solutes, sugars and related substances, bind to membrane receptor proteins which are coupled to a G-s protein (gustducin), which activates adenylyl cyclase (AC). Cyclic AMP (cAMP) dependent protein kinase (PKA) reduces K+ efflux in the apical membrane and produces membrane depolarization (Figure 9.5). Some sweet solutes and non-sugar sweeteners interact with a receptor membrane protein through a G protein, which activates phospholipase C. A second messenger, inositol triphosphate (IP3), is synthesized which releases Ca2+ from intracellular stores. Accumulation of Ca2+ depolarizes the cell, releasing neurotransmitter at the synapse.
Bitter tasting solutes include many non-toxic and toxic alkaloids, hydrophilic quinine and some divalent ions. The transduction of bitter tastes involves several mechanisms: 1) blockage of the efflux of K+ by a number of hydrophilic bitter substances generates a depolarizing potential; 2) interaction with a receptor membrane receptor coupled to the G protein, gustducin, and activation of cAMP dependent protein kinase with blockage of K+ channels; and 3) involves a receptor protein linked to G-protein and activation of phospholipase C, which results in substrate hydrolysis to IP3, releasing Ca2+ from intracellular stores.

These mechanisms for taste transduction were identified in laboratory animals and are probably present in the microvilli and apical membrane of taste receptor cells in humans. A fifth taste quality, umami, is predicted to interact with a ligand-gated inotropic glutamate receptor coupled to gustducin and to Ca2+ channel membrane proteins.

Taste stimuli produce depolarizing and hyperpolarizing potentials in individual taste cells. Excitation of voltage-gated Na+, K+, and Ca2+ channels can generate action potentials which are propagated toward the basal region of the taste cell. These currents open the voltage-gated Ca2+ channels near the base of the taste cells, which leads to the subsequent release of neurotransmitter. These transmitters diffuse across the synaptic cleft and lead to the initiation of action potentials in the afferent nerve fibers.
Historically, regional differences for each taste quality were predicted to exist on the tongue’s surface (e.g., sweet on the tip, sourness and salts on the sides, bitter in the posterior region). However, taste studies conducted on the neural response of whole cranial nerves demonstrate that a pattern of activity is produced by foods that are similar in taste. These patterns of activity are a clue to a taste code that occurs in many different taste cells and neurons responding to a particular taste stimulus. This finding indicates that no single fiber conducts only one taste quality (i.e., sweet, sour), although it may respond best to one quality and least to another. Recognition that branches of nerve fibers innervate several cells within and between taste buds indicates that a population of sensory nerve fibers activated by a taste stimulus transmits a neural code of the taste quality.

Branches of the facial cranial nerve, the chorda tympani, innervate taste buds in the anterior 2/3 of the tongue and part of the soft palate. The glossopharyngeal innervate the posterior 1/3 of the tongue. Both the vagus and glossopharyngeal nerves innervate the pharynx and epiglottis. Axons of these three cranial nerves terminate on 2nd order sensory neurons in the nucleus of the solitary tract. From this site in the rostral medulla, axons project into the parabrachial nucleus in lower animals but not in humans. In humans, fibers of the 2nd order neurons travel through the ipsilateral central tegmental tract to the 3rd order sensory neurons in the ventroposterior medial nucleus (VPM) of the thalamus. The VPM projects to the ipsilateral gustatory cortex located near the post-central gyrus representing the tongue or to the insular cortex.
The olfactory system in humans is an extremely discriminative and sensitive chemosensory system. Humans can distinguish between 1,000 to a predicted high of 4,000 odors. All of these odors can be classified into six major groups; floral, fruit, spicy, resin, burnt, and putrid (Refer back to Figure 9.1). The perception of odors begins with the inhalation and transport of volatile aromas to the olfactory mucosa that are located bilaterally in the dorsal posterior region of the nasal cavity.
The olfactory mucosa consists of a layer of columnar epithelium, surrounding millions of olfactory neurons, which are the only neurons to communicate with the external environment and undergo constant replacement. Basal cells near the lamina propria undergo differentiation and develop into these neurons about every 5-8 weeks. The glial-like columnar cells surround and support the bipolar neurons. These columnar cells have microvilli at their apex and secrete mucus which is layered on the surface of the olfactory mucosa (Figure 9.8).
The bipolar olfactory neurons have a single dendrite which projects towards the apical mucosa. The terminal ending of the dendrites are flattened and have 5-25 cilia that are embedded in the mucosa on the surface. Each cilia may have as many as 40 specific receptor membrane proteins for interaction with different odorant molecules. The density of these receptors is enormous for humans, but significantly greater in many lower animals.
Unbound hydrophilic odor molecules diffuse across the layer of mucus, whereas hydrophobic odors must become bound to a specific odorant binding protein to be transported to each cilium for interaction with specific receptors. All of these receptors have the same general structure, seven hydrophobic transmembrane regions, but the amino acid sequence within the cylinders spanning the membrane are extremely diverse which permits the discrimination of a large number of odors.
Odorant molecules bind reversibly to the diverse receptor membrane proteins which are coupled to a G-s group of proteins called Golf. Activation of adenylyl cyclase leads to the formation of cAMP with the activation of Ca2+/ Na+ cation channels. The primary effect of influx of these ions is depolarization and the generation of a generator potential (Figure 9.9). Generated ionic currents are graded in response to the flow rate of the odorant molecules and to their concentration. Sites of summated generator potentials occur across the olfactory mucosa to produce specific spatial pattern of activity for each stimulating odorant molecules, which may contribute to neural coding of odors. These spatial responses across the olfactory mucosa can be recorded (electro-olfactograms) with surface electrodes.
The resulting influx of Na+ and Ca2+ produces a depolarizing generator potential that spreads to the axon hillock. There, action potentials are generated, which are propagated to the synaptic endings in the olfactory bulb (Figure 9.9).
The action potential frequency is proportional to the concentration of specific odorant molecules. However, action potential frequency will be attenuated by adaptation or desensitization of the receptor and reduction in the production of cAMP.

Rapid adaptation and removal of the odorants permit continued recognition and discrimination of new aromas that are inhaled in the next respiratory cycle. Action potentials generated in the axon terminals of activated neurons are propagated into the glomeruli within the olfactory bulb. The olfactory bulbs have many different types of neurons and these have a laminar distribution. On the ventral side of the olfactory bulbs is a layer of glomeruli. This is a site at which axon terminals of several thousand olfactory neurons synapse with numerous dendrites from large mitral cells and tufted cells. Interneurons such as the inhibitory periglomerular cells synapse with the nerve endings within adjacent glomeruli.

Millions of axon fibers converge upon only a few thousand glomeruli within each bulb to synapse with about 75,000 mitral cells (see Figure 9.10) and about twice this number of tufted/periglomerular cells. Mitral cells are 2nd order sensory neurons whose axons enter the olfactory tract and ascend to the olfactory cortex. This convergence/divergence between the axons of olfactory neurons and the specialized cells of the olfactory bulb generate excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs) in the dendrites of mitral cells and subsequent action potentials. Lateral inhibition by the periglomerular cells modulates activity in adjacent glomeruli innervated by other mitral and tuft cells. A complex pattern of neuronal integration for discrimination of various odorant molecules is indicated by the mechanisms of convergence/divergence with excitation/inhibition of these 2nd order sensory neurons. This complexity is related to the recognition that no single odor stimulates a specific group of olfactory neurons. Rather a neural code is created from the activation of multiple receptors and neurons.
Axons from mitral and tuft cells project caudally into the olfactory tract. Fibers diverge and synapse with neurons of the anterior olfactory nucleus (AON). Axons from the AON cross to the opposite side of the hemisphere through the anterior commissure. The majority of the axons from the olfactory bulb diverge laterally and form the lateral olfactory tract which synapse with nuclei of the olfactory cortex. These are the piriform cortex (pc), the periamygdaloid cortex, part of the amygdala, and hippocampus. There are no direct relays from the olfactory bulb into the thalamus, but a few fibers synapse with 3rd order sensory neurons in the thalamic dorsomedial nucleus which are projected to the ipsilateral cerebral hemisphere (Figure 9.11).
In conclusion, many olfactory receptors respond to more than one odorant quality just like the taste receptor cells. Coding of the primary odor depends on the intensity of the odor and on a population response within the olfactory neurons. During neural processing in the olfactory bulb, a particular discharge occurs to one odorant and a different pattern for another odorant. This sensory input must be processed before being relayed to the olfactory cortex for perception and recognition of the individual odor.
All living organisms monitor their environment and one important aspect of that environment is gravity and the orientation of the body with respect to gravity. In addition, animals that locomote must be able to adjust their orientation with respect to self generated movements, as well as forces that are exerted upon them from the outside world. The vestibular system performs these essential tasks. It engages a number of reflex pathways that are responsible for making compensatory movements and adjustments in body position. It also engages pathways that project to the cortex to provide perceptions of gravity and movement. The first section of the Chapter begins with a description of the components of the peripheral sensory apparatus and describes the ways in which specialized receptors transduce mechanical signals into electrical events. The second section describes the projections of the vestibular afferents to the vestibular nuclei, and projection pathways from the vestibular nuclei to other brain structures such as the cerebellum.

The membranous labyrinth of the inner ear consists of three semicircular ducts (horizontal, anterior and posterior), two otolith organs (saccule and utricle), and the cochlea (which is discussed in the chapter on Auditory System: Structure and Function).
Figure 10,1 shows the main action of the semicircular ducts. These sensory organs respond to angular acceleration. In Figure 10.1, press the "expand" button to see progressively finer views of the horizontal semicircular duct. This expansion proceeds from the inner ear as it sits in the head, to a sketch of the horizontal semicircular duct, to a detail of the ampulla. (In the outline of the single horizontal semicircular duct the angle has changed, and what was initially horizontal is now seen as a vertically-oriented duct on the computer screen.) The ampulla is a localized dilatation at one end of the semicircular duct. A patch of innervated hair cells is found at the base of the ampulla in a structure termed a crista (meaning crest). The crista contains hair cells with stereocilia oriented in a consistent direction. The cupula, a thin vane, sits atop this crest, filling the lumen of the semicircular duct. The stereocilia of the hair cells are embedded in the gelatinous cupula.

By pressing the "play button" in Figure 10,1, the animation will show the effects of head rotation. As the head rotates in one direction, inertia of the fluid causes it to lag, and hence generate relative motion in the semicircular duct in the direction opposite that of the head movement. This moving fluid bends the broad vane of the cupula. The stereocilia of the hair cells are bent because they are embedded in the gelatinous cupula. Shearing of the hair cells opens potassium channels, as discussed at the beginning of the auditory section (See Figure 12.1).
There are three pairs of semicircular ducts, which are oriented roughly 90 degrees to each other for maximum ability to detect angular rotation of the head. Each slender duct has one ampulla. When the head turns, fluid in one or more semicircular ducts pushes against the cupula and bends the cilia of the hair cells. Fluid in the corresponding semicircular duct on the opposite side of the head moves in the opposite direction.

The basic transduction mechanism is the same in the auditory and vestibular systems (See Figure 12.1). A mechanical stimulus bends the cilia of the hair cells. Fine thread-like tip links connect to trap doors in the adjacent cilium. Bending the hair cells stretches the tip link, causing an influx of K+ ions and the generation of neural impulses in the VIIIth cranial nerve.

Hair cells in the vestibular system are slightly different from those in the auditory system, in that vestibular hair cells have one tallest cilium, termed the kinocilium. Bending the stereocilia toward the kinocilium depolarizes the cell and results in increased afferent activity. Bending the stereocilia away from the kinocilium hyperpolarizes the cell and results in a decrease in afferent activity.

The semicircular ducts work in pairs to detect head movements (angular acceleration). A turn of the head excites the receptors in one ampulla and inhibits receptors in the ampulla on the other side.
Figure 10,2 is an extension of Figure 10.1. Begin by pressing "expand" to show details from the horizontal semicircular ducts on both sides of the head. Beneath the ampullae are new details, which highlight the orientation of the stereocilia in both cristae and their outputs. The kinocilia are oriented in the direction of the ampullae (ampullo fugal) within the ducts on both sides. The two sides are mirror images. There is a constant low level of ionic influx into the body of the hair cells, so there is a steady-state receptor potential and a spontaneous low-level discharge of afferent activity. These neutral neurophysiological properties are shown in graphs below each ampulla.

Figure 10,2 is a diagram of the cranial nerves and their nuclei that mediate interactions between the vestibular system and eye muscles appears as an inset. By pressing the "play" button you will see an animation of this. A constant low level of spontaneous activity keeps all the muscles slightly and equally contracted, causing the eyes to look straight ahead. When the head turns, inertia causes the fluid to move more slowly than the head, generating relative fluid motion in the semicircular duct in the opposite direction of the head turn. This moving fluid, shown by arrows in the lumens of the semicircular duct, bends the hair cells on both sides of the head. Because the two sides are mirror images, the stereocilia are bent toward their kinocilium on one side and away from their kinocilium on the other side. Shearing of the stereocilia toward the kinocilium causes a depolarization of the receptor potential and an increase in afferent action potentials. There is an opposite effect on the other side – a decrease in afferent activity. These counteracting bilateral changes in afferent activity affect the vestibular and oculomotor nuclei. The ampullo fugal movement of fluid on the patient's right (reader's left) causes an increase in afferent activity (shown in green for "go" in the inset). This has a positive effect on the right medial and superior vestibular nuclei, which in turn stimulate the ipsilateral oculomotor and contralateral abducens nuclei. There are exactly opposite effects on the other side (shown in red for "stop" in the inset). The result of these combined counteracting effects is a smooth movement of the eyes toward the left, keeping the visual field stable as the head turns.
Figure 10,3 illustrates the otolithic organs, the saccule and utricle. Press "expand" to see the utricle at the top of Figure 10.3 and the saccule at the bottom. These two similar organs lie against the walls of the inner ear between the semicircular ducts and the cochlea. The receptors, called maculae (meaning "spot"), are patches of hair cells topped by small, calcium carbonate crystals called otoconia. The saccule and utricle lie at 90 degrees to each other. Thus, with any position of the head, gravity will bend the cilia of one patch of hair cells, due to the weight of the otoconia to which they are attached by a gelatinous layer. This bending of the cilia produces afferent activity going through the VIIIth nerve to the brainstem.

Activate Figure 10,3 to view the actions of the utricle and saccule. The utricle is most sensitive to tilt when the head is upright. The saccule is most sensitive to tilt when the head is horizontal. Unlike the semicircular ducts, the kinocilia of hair cells in the maculae are NOT oriented in a consistent direction. The kinocilia point toward (in the utricle) or away from (in the saccule) a middle line called the striola. The striola is shown as a dashed line in Figure 10.3. Because hair cells are oriented in different directions, tilts in any direction will activate some afferents.
The vestibulo-ocular reflex (VOR) controls eye movements to stabilize images during head movements. As the head moves in one direction, the eyes reflexively move in the other direction. The VOR is only effective up to a speed of about 50o/sec. The action of the VOR can be seen by moving your head from side to side. The image you see is stable, despite the head movement. But as you increase the speed of oscillatory head movements, you can get to a rate of angular velocity where the VOR is no longer effective, and you will see the visual image start to shift. The VOR would occur in the dark, because the eyes move due to angular acceleration of the head.

The inset in Figure10,2 that appears when you press the "play" button shows the CNS connections involved in the VOR. This is a three-neuron circuit. One neuron is in Scarpa's (the vestibular) ganglion; one neuron is in a vestibular nucleus; and one neuron is in an extraocular motor nucleus.
A variant of the VOR, called caloric nystagmus, is used as a test of the vestibular system. If the ear is irrigated with a fluid having a temperature different than the body (either warmer or cooler), a thermal gradient will be conduced across the small space of the middle ear.

Figure 10,4 shows a caloric response. Here, cold water is put in the right ear. About 20 ml is injected over about 30 s. The cold water cools the tympanic membrane, which cools the air in the middle ear, and finally the endolymph. This primarily affects the horizontal semicircular canal because it is close to the middle ear space.

Cooling somehow hyperpolarizes the hair cells, causing the eyes to drift slowly to the right as if the head was moving to the left. When the eyes have moved as far to the side as they can go, there is a quick resetting movement in the opposite direction. This cycle of slow and fast eye-movements is called a nystagmus. Nystagmus is labeled by the direction of the fast component. Figure 10,4 is an illustration of a left-beating nystagmus. Caloric vestibular testing is quantified by the magnitude and direction of the nystagmus. A useful mnemonic is COWS, meaning "cold-opposite warm-same". That is, irrigation of one ear with cold water produces a nystagmus away from the irrigated ear, while warm water produces a nystagmus toward the same ear. The normal response in a caloric vestibular test is symmetric and opposite responses in both ears. Weakness of the caloric response (eyes not moving when warm or cold water is flushed through one ear), or a spontaneous nystagmus (constantly moving eyes, as if the head was spinning when it is stable), indicates vestibular lesions.
The first-order vestibular afferents have their cell bodies in the vestibular (Scarpa’s) ganglion, which is found at the distal end of the internal auditory meatus. Their axons travel in the vestibular portion of the VIIIth cranial nerve through the internal auditory meatus and enter the brain stem at the junction between the pons and the medulla where the IVth ventricle is the widest. Most of these afferents project to one of the four nearby vestibular nuclei in the rostral medulla and caudal pons. A few of the vestibular afferents go directly to the cerebellum through the inferior cerebellar peduncle. The cerebellum coordinates the movements that maintain balance. There are many connections between the cerebellum and the vestibular nuclei.
Figure 11,1 shows a summary of these ascending and descending vestibular pathways. Upon pressing the "play" button, the four vestibular nuclei appear in outline. Note that the medial and inferior nuclei are usually seen together in the rostral medulla. The lateral and superior nuclei are smaller and are seen in the pons. The ascending tracts are shown in blue. These arise from the superior and medial nuclei and ascend in medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF) to the oculomotor nuclei (III, IV, VI).The lateral vestibulospinal tract is shown in green. It descends ipsilaterally to the sacral cord. The medial vestibulospinal tract is shown in red. It descends bilaterally in the MLF to thoracic levels. The cerebellar afferents are not shown in this summary, but these come from the medial and inferior vestibular nuclei.

The 1st order vestibular afferents arise in Scarpa's ganglion, which is in the distal portion of the internal auditory meatus. The axons travel in the vestibular portion of the VIIIth cranial nerve and enter the brain stem at the pontomedullary junction.

There are four 2nd order vestibular nuclei: the inferior, medial, lateral (Deiter’s) and superior vestibular nuclei. All four nuclei are found beneath the floor of the fourth ventricle in the medulla and pons, lateral to the sulcus limitans. The main projections from these nuclei are to the spinal cord (controlling head and body position), to the three, extraocular motor nuclei (III, IV, VI, controlling eye movements), to the thalamus (VPI, eventually reaching the cortex and conscious perception of movement and gravity), and to the cerebellum (coordinating postural adjustments).

The main descending tracts are the lateral vestibulospinal tract from the lateral vestibular nucleus and the medial vestibulospinal tract from the medial vestibular nucleus. The lateral vestibular tract starts in the lateral vestibular nucleus and descends the length of the spinal cord on the same side. This pathway helps us walk upright. The medial vestibular tract starts in the medial vestibular nucleus and extends bilaterally through mid-thoracic levels of the spinal cord in the MLF. This tract affects head movements and helps integrate head and eye movements. In summary, remember that the lateral vestibulo-spinal tract is ipsilateral and long; the medial vestibulo-spinal tract is bilateral but shorter.

The main ascending tracts are from the superior and medial vestibular nuclei to the extraocular muscles through the medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF).

Figure 11,2 shows details of the vestibular fibers ascending in the MLF to the oculomotor nuclei. Second-order afferents arise in the medial and superior vestibular nuclei. Connections from the MLF to the abducens, trochlear and oculomotor nuclei can be seen. These connections coordinate eye movements in response to head movements. Details of this coordination for horizontal eye movements are elaborated in the section on vestibular structure and function (See Figure 10.2).
Figure 11,3 shows controversial details of the ascending vestibular pathway that gives rise to the conscious perception. Afferents from primarily the superior vestibular nucleus ascend to the thalamus (the ventral posterior intermediate nucleus) probably in the lateral lemniscus or in the reticular formation beside the MLF. The primary cortical receiving areas for the vestibular system are more diffuse than for other sensory systems, and there is some dispute about their locations. Most people believe there is a cortical vestibular area in the parietal lobe near where the intraparietal sulcus meets the postcentral gyrus. This would be close to the somatic area of the head, which makes sense for the sensation of dizziness. Others believe there is an area of vestibular cortex anterior to primary auditory cortex. (See Figure 13.3) This pathway is bilateral.
Figure 11,4 shows details of the vestibulo-cerebellar connections. Some vestibular afferents go directly to the cerebellum through the inferior cerebellar peduncle. Most 1st order afferents synapse in the medial and inferior vestibular nuclei and then ascend to the cerebellum in the inferior cerebellar peduncle. Most of these afferents innervate the flocculonodular node. Many interconnections are found between the vestibular nuclei and the cerebellum, which coordinate the postural adjustments.
Figure 11,5 shows details of the lateral vestibulospinal tract. As the name suggests, this tract arises in the lateral vestibular nucleus. The tract descends through the inferior vestibular nucleus, giving this nucleus its "salt and pepper" appearance. Below the medulla the lateral vestibulospinal tract descends in the anterior white matter down the entire length of the spinal cord. This tract modulates postural adjustments to movements. For example, the reason we stagger after spinning is due to excess activity in the lateral vestibulospinal tract.
Figure 11,6 shows details of the medial vestibulospinal tract. As its name suggests, this tract starts in the medial vestibular nucleus. It is a bilateral tract. It descends no lower than the mid-thoracic cord. It mediates head position by controlling the muscles of the neck and shoulder

The key structure in the vertebrate auditory and vestibular systems is the hair cell. The hair cell first appeared in fish as part of a long, thin array along the side of the body, sensing movements in the water. In higher vertebrates the internal fluid of the inner ear (not external fluid as in fish) bathes the hair cells, but these cells still sense movements in the surrounding fluid. Several specializations make human hair cells responsive to various forms of mechanical stimulation. Hair cells in the Organ of Corti in the cochlea of the ear respond to sound. Hair cells in the cristae ampullares in the semicircular ducts respond to angular acceleration (rotation of the head). Hair cells in the maculae of the saccule and the utricle respond to linear acceleration (gravity). (See the chapter on Vestibular System: Structure and Function). The fluid, termed endolymph, which surrounds the hair cells is rich in potassium. This actively maintained ionic imbalance provides an energy store, which is used to trigger neural action potentials when the hair cells are moved. Tight junctions between hair cells and the nearby supporting cells form a barrier between endolymph and perilymph that maintains the ionic imbalance.

Figure 12,1 illustrates the process of mechanical transduction at the tips of the hair cell cilia. Cilia emerge from the apical surface of hair cells. These cilia increase in length along a consistent axis. There are tiny thread-like connections from the tip of each cilium to a non-specific cation channel on the side of the taller neighboring cilium. The tip links function like a string connected to a hinged hatch. When the cilia are bent toward the tallest one, the channels are opened, much like a trap door. Opening these channels allows an influx of potassium, which in turns opens calcium channels that initiates the receptor potential. This mechanism transduces mechanical energy into neural impulses. An inward K+ current depolarizes the cell, and opens voltage-dependent calcium channels. This in turn causes neurotransmitter release at the basal end of the hair cell, eliciting an action potential in the dendrites of the VIIIth cranial nerve.

Press the "play" button to see the mechanical-to-electrical transduction. Hair cells normally have a small influx of K+ at rest, so there is some baseline activity in the afferent neurons. Bending the cilia toward the tallest one opens the potassium channels and increases afferent activity. Bending the cilia in the opposite direction closes the channels and decreases afferent activity. Bending the cilia to the side has no effect on spontaneous neural activity.
The auditory system changes a wide range of weak mechanical signals into a complex series of electrical signals in the central nervous system. Sound is a series of pressure changes in the air. Sounds often vary in frequency and intensity over time. Humans can detect sounds that cause movements only slightly greater than those of Brownian movement. Obviously, if we heard that ceaseless (except at absolute zero) motion of air molecules we would have no silence.
Figure 12,2 depicts these alternating compression and rarefaction (pressure) waves impinging on the ear. The pinna and external auditory meatus collect these waves, change them slightly, and direct them to the tympanic membrane. The resulting movements of the eardrum are transmitted through the three middle-ear ossicles (malleus, incus and stapes) to the fluid of the inner ear. The footplate of the stapes fits tightly into the oval window of the bony cochlea. The inner ear is filled with fluid. Since fluid is incompressible, as the stapes moves in and out there needs to be a compensatory movement in the opposite direction. Notice that the round window membrane, located beneath the oval window, moves in the opposite direction.

Because the tympanic membrane has a larger area than the stapes footplate there is a hydraulic amplification of the sound pressure. Also because the arm of the malleus to which the tympanic membrane is attached is longer than the arm of the incus to which the stapes is attached, there is a slight amplification of the sound pressure by a lever action. These two impedance matching mechanisms effectively transmit air-born sound into the fluid of the inner ear. If the middle-ear apparatus (ear drum and ossicles) were absent, then sound reaching the oval and round windows would be largely reflected.
The cochlea is a long coiled tube, with three channels divided by two thin membranes. The top tube is the scala vestibuli, which is connected to the oval window. The bottom tube is the scala tympani, which is connected to the round window. The middle tube is the scala media, which contains the Organ of Corti. The Organ of Corti sits on the basilar membrane, which forms the division between the scalae media and tympani.

Figure 12,3 illustrates a cross section through the cochlea. The three scalae (vestibuli, media, tympani) are cut in several places as they spiral around a central core. The cochlea makes 2-1/2 turns in the human (hence the 5 cuts in midline cross section). The tightly coiled shape gives the cochlea its name, which means snail in Greek (as in conch shell). As explained in Tonotopic Organization, high frequency sounds stimulate the base of the cochlea, whereas low frequency sounds stimulate the apex. This feature is depicted in the animation of Figure 12,3 with neural impulses (having colors from red to blue representing low to high frequencies, respectively) emerging from different turns of the cochlea. The activity in Figure 12,3 would be generated by white noise that has all frequencies at equal amplitudes. The moving dots are meant to indicate afferent action potentials. Low frequencies are transduced at the apex of the cochlea and are represented by red dots. High frequencies are transduced at base of the cochlea and are represented by blue dots. A consequence of this arrangement is that low frequencies are found in the central core of the cochlear nerve, with high frequencies on the outside.
Figure 12,4 illustrates one cross section of the cochlea. Sound waves cause the oval and round windows at the base of the cochlea to move in opposite directions (See Figure 12.2). This causes the basilar membrane to be displaced and starts a traveling wave that sweeps from the base toward the apex of the cochlea (See Figure 12.7). The traveling wave increases in amplitude as it moves, and reaches a peak at a place that is directly related to the frequency of the sound. The illustration shows a section of the cochlea that is moving in response to sound.

Figure 12,5 illustrates a higher magnification of the Organ of Corti. The traveling wave causes the basilar membrane and hence the Organ of Corti to move up and down. The organ of Corti has a central stiffening buttress formed by paired pillar cells. Hair cells protrude from the top of the Organ of Corti. A tectorial (roof) membrane is held in place by a hinge-like mechanism on the side of the Organ of Corti and floats above the hair cells. As the basilar and tectorial membranes move up and down with the traveling wave, the hinge mechanism causes the tectorial membrane to move laterally over the hair cells. This lateral shearing motion bends the cilia atop the hair cells, pulls on the fine tip links, and opens the trap-door channels (See Figure 12.1). The influx of potassium and then calcium causes neurotransmitter release, which in turn causes an EPSP that initiates action potentials in the afferents of the VIIIth cranial nerve. Most of the afferent dendrites make synaptic contacts with the inner hair cells.
Figure 12,6 looks down on the Organ of Corti. There are two types of hair cells, inner and outer. There is one row of inner hair cells and three rows of outer hair cells. Most of the afferent dendrites synapse on inner hair cells. Most of efferent axons synapse on the outer hair cells. The outer hair cells are active. They move in response to sound and amplify the traveling wave. The outer hair cells also produce sounds that can be detected in the external auditory meatus with sensitive microphones. These internally generated sounds, termed otoacoustic emissions, are now used to screen newborns for hearing loss. Figure 12.6 shows an immunofluorescent whole mount image of a neonatal mouse cochlea showing the three rows of outer hair cells and the single row of inner hair cells. The mature human cochlea would look approximately the same. Superimposed schematically-depicted neurons show the typical pattern of afferent connections. Ninety-five percent of the VIIIth nerve afferents synapse on inner hair cells. Each inner hair cell makes synaptic connections with many afferents. Each afferent connects to only one inner hair cell. About five percent of the afferents synapse on outer hair cells. These afferents travel a considerable distance along the basilar membrane away from their ganglion cells to synapse on multiple outer hair cells. Less than one percent (~0.5%) of the afferents synapse on multiple inner hair cells. The below micrograph is courtesy of Dr. Douglas Cotanche, Department of Otolaryngology, Children's Hospital of Boston, Harvard Medical School. Reprinted with permission.

Physical characteristics of the basilar membrane cause different frequencies to reach maximum amplitudes at different positions. Much as on a piano, high frequencies are at one end and low frequencies at the other. High frequencies are transduced at the base of the cochlea whereas low frequencies are transduced at the apex. Figure 12.7 illustrates the way in which the cochlea acts as a frequency analyzer. The cochlea codes the pitch of a sound by the place of maximal vibration. Note the position of the traveling wave at different frequencies. (Beware! It may initially seem backwards that low frequencies are not associated with the base.) Select different frequencies by turning the dial. If audio on your computer is enabled, you will hear the sound you selected. Hearing loss at high frequencies is common. The average loss of hearing in American males is about a cycle per second per day (starting at about age 20, so a 50-year old would likely have difficulty hearing over 10 kHz). If you can't hear the high frequencies, it may be due to the speakers on your computer, but it is always worth thinking about hearing preservation.

As you listen to these sounds, note that the high frequencies seem strangely similar. Think about cochlear-implant patients. These patients have lost hair-cell function. Their auditory nerve is stimulated by a series of implanted electrodes. The implant can only be placed in the base of the cochlea, because it is surgically impossible to thread the fine wires more than about 2/3 of a turn. Thus, cochlear implant patients probably experience something like high frequency sounds.
Figure 12,8 shows the range of frequencies and intensities of sound to which the human auditory system responds. Our absolute threshold, the minimum level of sound that we can detect, is strongly dependent on frequency. At the level of pain, sound levels are about six orders of magnitude above the minimal audible threshold. Sound pressure level (SPL) is measured in decibels (dB). Decibels are a logarithmic scale, with each 6 dB increase indicating a doubling of intensity. The perceived loudness of a sound is related to its intensity. Sound frequencies are measured in Hertz (Hz), or cycles per second. Normally, we hear sounds as low as 20 Hz and as high as 20,000 Hz. The frequency of a sound is associated with its pitch. Hearing is best at about 3-4 kHz. Hearing sensitivity decreases at higher and lower frequencies, but more so at higher than lower frequencies. High-frequency hearing is typically lost as we age.
The neural code in the central auditory system is complex. Tonotopic organization is maintained throughout the auditory system. Tonotopic organization means that cells responsive to different frequencies are found in different places at each level of the central auditory system, and that there is a standard (logarithmic) relationship between this position and frequency. Each cell has a characteristic frequency (CF). The CF is the frequency to which the cell is maximally responsive. A cell will usually respond to other frequencies, but only at greater intensities. The neural tuning curve is a plot of the amplitude of sounds at various frequencies necessary to elicit a response from a central auditory neuron. The tuning curves for several different neurons are superimposed on the audibility curves in Figure 12.8. The depicted neurons have CFs that vary from low to high frequencies (and are shown with red to blue colors, respectively). If we recorded from all auditory neurons, we would basically fill the area within the audibility curves. When sounds are soft they will stimulate only those few neurons with that CF, and thus neural activity will be confined to one set of fibers or cells at one particular place. As sounds get louder they stimulate other neurons, and the area of activity will increase.

Graduate Students Sarah Baum, Heather Turner, Nadeeka Dias, Deepna Thakkar, Natalie Sirisaengtaksin and Jonathan Flynn of the Neuroscience Graduate Program at UTHealth Houston further explain the structures, functions and pathways of the auditory system in an animated video "The Journey of Sound".
Connections in the central auditory system are complex, but a simple summary is that information proceeds from the Organ of Corti to spiral ganglion cells and the VIIIth nerve afferents in the ear, to the cochlear nuclei, many crossing in the trapezoid body to the superior olive in the brain stem. Then all ascending fibers stop in the inferior colliculus in the midbrain and the medial geniculate body in the thalamus, before reaching the cortex in the superior temporal gyrus. All auditory afferents synapse in the cochlear nuclei and in the thalamus. Beyond that simplification, second order fibers from the cochlear nuclei proceed rostrally in several different pathways. Afferents are generally distributed bilaterally so unilateral damage at any level does not usually result in deafness in either ear.
Figure 13,1 shows a fiber traveling somewhat directly from the cochlea to the cortex. This is a fast acting system. These fibers synapse in the dorsal cochlear nucleus, and may function as a general warning (as when you might jump from a loud sound). These fibers decussate and ascend in the lateral lemniscus to the inferior colliculus.
Figure 13,2 shows the more numerous connections that work their way rostrally through a more detailed pathway. This slow acting system involves much more processing and may provide more detailed information about the sound, such as its location. These fibers synapse in the ventral cochlear nucleus. Fibers from the ventral cochlear nucleus synapse in the ipsilateral and contralateral superior olivary nucleus. Some fibers from the ventral cochlear nucleus cross the midline in the trapezoid body. Thus, cells in the superior olive receive inputs from both ears and are the first place in the central auditory system where binaural processing (stereo hearing) is possible. The output of the superior olive travels in the lateral lemniscus. Some nuclei within the lateral lemniscus further process the sound. Most of these afferents synapse in the inferior colliculus. All afferents then synapse in the medial geniculate body of the thalamus. Thalamic afferents reach the superior temporal gyrus through the sub-lenticular portion of the internal capsule.
Figure 13,3 shows the same detail processing system as in Figure 13,2, only now with the more realistic situation of input from both ears. The two different patterns of dashed lines combine to form a solid line above the superior olive, meant to indicate the combination of monaural inputs into bilateral and binaural activation.

Primary auditory cortex, or Herschel’s gyrus in insular cortex, is tonotopically organized. Afferents from this longitudinal strip on the superior temporal gyrus diverge to a wide variety of other cortical processing areas, including Wernicke’s area in the parietal lobe where speech is processed.

Auditory afferents are tonotopically organized from the ear to the cortex. This starts with high frequencies transduced at the base of the cochlea, and low frequencies transduced at the apex (see Figure 12.7). Click on the cochlea in Figure 13.3 to see the color code of pitch, as if the cochlea were a piano. Low frequency fibers then pass in the central core of the VIIth nerve surrounded by high frequency fibers (see Auditory System: Structure and Function). This segregation of high and low frequencies persists throughout the CNS. As seen in Figure 13,3, low frequencies are more lateral in primary auditory cortex.
In this chapter you will learn about how the visual system initiates the processing of external stimuli. The chapter will familiarize you with measures of visual sensation by discussing the basis of form perception, visual acuity, visual field representation, binocular fusion, and depth perception. An important aspect is the regional differences in our visual perception: the central visual field is color-sensitive, has high acuity vision, operates at high levels of illumination whereas the periphery is more sensitive at low levels of illumination, is relatively color insensitive, and has poor visual acuity. You will learn that the image is first projected onto a flattened sheet of photoreceptor cells that lie on the inner surface of the eye (retina). The information gathered by millions of receptor cells is projected next onto millions of bipolar cells, which, in turn, send projects to retinal ganglion cells. These cells encode different aspects of the visual stimulus, and thus carry independent, parallel, streams of information about stimulus size, color, and movement to the visual thalamus.
The condition of the visual system can be determined by examining various aspects of visual sensation. For example, the ability to detect and identify small objects (i.e., visual acuity) can be affected by disorders in the transparent media of the eye and/or visual nervous system. The inability to detect objects in specific areas of space (i.e., visual field defects) is often related to neural damage.
The visual field is that area in space perceived when the eyes are in a fixed, static position looking straight ahead.
The monocular visual field (Figure 14.1)

is that area of space visible to one eye
can be mapped parametrically
Perimetry testing provides a detailed map of the visual field. The potential visual field is described as a hemisphere. However, it does not form a perfect hemisphere as the brow, nose and cheekbones obscure the view - most prominently in the nasal hemisphere
is subdivided into two halves, the hemifields (Figure 14.1 Inset).
A horizontal line drawn from 0° to 180° through center of the field defines the superior & inferior hemifields.
A vertical line drawn from 90° to 270° through center point defines the left & right hemifields, which are often termed the nasal and temporal hemifields.
may be further subdivided into quadrants:
the superior and inferior nasal quadrants
the superior and inferior temporal quadrants.
contains a blind spot,
a small area in which objects cannot be viewed
which is located within the temporal hemifield.
The monocular visual field (Figure 14.1) is determined with one eye covered. The area of overlap of the visual field of one eye with that of the opposite eye is called the binocular field (Figure 14.2). All areas of the binocular visual field are “seen” by both eyes.

The ability to locate objects in space and the ability to orient ourselves with respect to external objects are dependent upon the representation of visual space within the nervous system. The clinical examination of the visual fields most commonly used is the confrontation field test. It defines the outer limits of our subjective visual space. Neurological disorders of the visual system can often be localized based on the area of blindness within the visual field.
Visual acuity is the ability to detect and recognize small objects visually depends on the refractory (focusing) power of the eye's lens system and the cytoarchitecture of the retina.

Visual acuity is

measured under high illumination
the smallest size of a dark object in a light background that can be correctly identified
In the clinical setting, an eye chart

is used to measure the patient’s visual acuity.
consists of rows of black letters on a bright white background.
is used to measure visual acuity at a distance of 20 ft from the chart.
reports visual acuity as the ratio of the eye chart distance (i.e., 20 ft) to the “normal distance” of the lowest row of letters correctly identified by the patient (e.g., row 3, which is 70 ft).
Color vision is the ability to detect differences in the wavelengths of light is called color vision. Clinically it may be tested with an Ishihara chart: a chart with spots of different colors that are spatially organized to form numbers that differ for ``normal” and color-blind eyes.

As mentioned above, the human has a trichromatic visual system, whereby visible colors can be created by a mixture of red, green and blue lights. The most common form of color blindness results in a confusion of red and green shades (i.e., red-green color blindness). Most cases of color blindness result from an absent or defective gene responsible for producing the red or green photopigment (protanopia, the lack of red; and deuteranopia, the lack of green). As these genes are located on the X chromosome, color blindness is more common in males than in females.

Regional differences: There are regional differences in color sensation, visual acuity and low-illumination sensitivity within the visual field (Figure 14.3).

A small “blind spot” is

located in the temporal hemifield (Figure 14.3 Left)
where objects cannot be seen.
Vision in the visual field center

operates best under high illumination.
has the greatest visual acuity and color sensitivity
is ten times better than in the field periphery (Figure 14.3 Right)
represents the operation of the photopic (light-adapted) subsystem
Vision in the peripheral visual field.

is more sensitive to dim light
operates under low illumination.
has little color sensitivity and poor spatial acuity (Figure 14.3 Right)
represents the operation of the scotopic (dark-adapted) subsystem.

When a pencil is held an arm’s length away with both eyes open, most individuals will see a single object and recognize it as a pencil. However, if one rapidly closes each eye alternately (i.e., left eye closed, right eye opened, then right eye opened and left eye closed); you should see the pencil “jumping” from left to right as you alternate the eye closure. This is so because the image in each eye is slightly different (disparate): Notice that because each eye is located on either side of the nose, the viewing angle of each eye is slightly different - especially when viewing near objects (Figure 14.4).

Although the area in space defined by the binocular visual field (Figure 14.4) represents corresponding areas of the monocular visual fields, the angle at which this space is viewed by each eye is slightly different. Consequently, the images of the corresponding (binocular) space are slightly different in each eye. The nervous system fuses these disparate binocular images to produce a single image (e.g., of the pencil located an arm’s length away). The process of producing a single image from the two disparate monocular images is called binocular fusion.

Clinically, binocular fusion is tested by holding up one or two fingers in front of the patient and asking the patient (who should be wearing corrective lenses if they are normally worn) how many fingers they see. If the patient reports seeing four fingers when only two are presented, the patient is unable to produce binocular fusion.

Binocular fusion permits the perception a single clear image and also provides extra cues for depth perception. That is, the binocular disparity between the two images is used by the nervous system to allow the perception of a three-dimensional world where the approximate distance of an object can be determined. The nervous system cannot fuse disparate binocular images when the disparity is too great. When corresponding areas of the normal binocular visual field are not in alignment (e.g., in strabismus where one eye deviates from the normal position and/or is paralyzed), the nervous system cannot fuse the disparate images and gradually adapts by “ignoring” the image from the deviant eye. In fact, strabismus at birth, if uncorrected, may result in a form of central blindness, amblyopia, where the image from the deviant eye is no longer represented at cortical levels of the nervous system. The uncorrected, long-term amblyope is functionally blind in one eye and has poor depth perception.
The transparent media of the eye function as a biconvex lens that refracts light entering the eye and focuses images of the external world onto the light sensitive retina.

Recall that light rays will bend when passing from one transparent medium into another if the speed of light differs in the two media. However, parallel light rays will pass from air through a transparent body (e.g., flat lens) without bending if the light rays are perpendicular to the lens surface (Figure 14.5, left). If the light strikes the lens surface at an angle, the light rays will be bent in a line perpendicular to the lens surface (Figure 14.5, right).
A @biconvex lens, which is functionally similar to the eye's lens system, is flat only at its center. The surface of the area surrounding the center is curved and not perpendicular to parallel light rays (Figure 14.6). Consequently, the curved surfaces of a biconvex lens will bend parallel light rays to focus an image of the object emitting the light a short distance behind the lens at its focal point. The image formed is clear only if the curvature of the lens is symmetrical in all meridians and all divergent light rays emitted by a point source converge at the focal point.
Note that the greater the curvature of the lens surface the greater is its refractive power and the closer is the focused image to the lens. Note also that the image formed is inverted and left-right reversed (Figure 14.7).

The image formed by eye’s lens system is smaller than the object viewed, inverted (upside-down, Figure 14.6), and reversed (right-left, Figure 14.7). As the image is inverted by the lens system, the superior (top) half of each eye’s visual field is projected onto the inferior (bottom) half of each eye’s retina. Also, as the lens produces a reversed image, the temporal half of each visual field is projected onto the nasal half of each eye’s retina1. Therefore, the temporal (left) hemifield of the left eye is projected onto the nasal (right) half of the left eye’s retina and the nasal (left) hemifield of right eye is projected onto temporal (right) half of the right eye’s retina. Consequently, the left hemifields of both eyes are projected onto the corresponding (right) halves of the two retinas. It is critical that you understand the relationship between the visual field and the retinal areas and realize that corresponding halves of the two monocular visual fields are imaged on corresponding halves of the two retinas. These relationships form the neurological basis for understanding visual field defects.
The eye must be able to change its refractive properties to focus images of both distant and nearby objects on the retina. Distant objects (greater than 30 feet or 9 meters away from the eye) emit or reflect light that can be focused on the retina in a normal relaxed eye (Figure 14.8).

If a viewed object is brought closer to the eye, the light rays from the object diverge at a greater angle relative to the eye (Figure 14.8). Consequently, the nearer the object of view, the greater the angle of incidence of light rays on the cornea, and the greater the refractive power required to focus the light rays on the retina. The cornea has a fixed refractive power (i.e. it cannot change its shape). However, altering the tension of the zonules on the elastic lens capsule can alter the lens shape. The change in the refractive properties of the eye is called the accommodation or "near point" process.

In the normal eye under resting (distant vision) conditions, the ciliary muscles are relaxed and the zonules are under tension (Figure 14.9). In this case, the lens is flattened, which reduces the refractive power of the lens to focus on distant objects. When an object is closer to the eye (i.e., less than 30 ft. away), accommodation occurs to affect “near vision”. The ciliary muscle contracts, pulling the ciliary processes toward the lens (remember the muscle acts as a sphincter). This action releases tension on the zonules and the lens capsule. The reduced tension allows the lens to become more spherical (i.e., increase its curvature). The increase in lens curvature increases the lens refractive power to focus on near objects. Consequently, as an object is moved closer to the viewer, his eyes accommodate to increase the lens curvature, which increases the refractive power of his eye (Figure 14.8).
Presbyopia: In presbyopia, there is normal distance vision, but lens accommodation is reduced with age. With age, the lens loses its elasticity and becomes a relatively solid mass. During accommodation, the lens is unable to assume a more spherical shape and is unable to increase its refractive power for near vision (Figure 14.10). As a result, when an object is less than 30 ft. away from the presbyopic viewer, the image is focused somewhere behind the retina.
A convex lens (i.e., increased refractive power) is used to correct the presbyopic eye (Figure 14.10). These lenses refract the light rays so they strike the surface of the cornea at a smaller angle. However, because the corrective lens increases the refractive power, the presbyope with convex lenses will have problems with distance vision. Consequently, the corrective lenses are often half lenses (i.e., reading glasses) which allow the presbyope to view objects in the distance unimpeded by the convex lens.

Hyperopia: In hyperopia (Figure 14.11), the refractive power of the eye’s lens system is too weak or the eyeball too short. When viewing distant objects, the image is focused at a point beyond the retina.
The young hyperope can compensate by using lens accommodation, i.e., increase the refractive power of the eye’s lens system (Figure 14.12). We call the hyperope "far-sighted" (hypermetropic) because the power of accommodation used for distance vision cannot be used for near vision.
As the hyperope ages and becomes presbyopic, the power of accommodation is diminished. Consequently, the middle aged hyperope may have a limited range (near and far) of vision. To correct this effect of aging, the refractive power of the eye is increased with convex lenses (Figure 14.12).

Myopia: In myopia (Figure 14.13), the refractive power of the eye’s lens system is too strong or the eyeball too long. When viewing distant objects, the image is focused at a point in front of retina.
The uncorrected myopic eye is "near-sighted" because it can focus unaided on near objects. That is, the young myope will see distant objects as blurred, poorly defined images but can see nearby small objects clearly (remember nearby objects emit divergent light rays).

For distance vision, the refractive power of the myopic eye lens system is corrected with concave lenses that diverge the light rays entering the eye (Figure 14.14). Note that as the power of accommodation diminishes with age, near vision is also affected in the presbyopic-myopic eye. The mature myope may require bifocals, the upper half of the lens diverging light rays for distance vision and the lower half with no or low converging power for near vision.
Astigmatism: An astigmatism results when the cornea surface does not resemble the surface of a sphere (e.g. is more oblong). In an eye with astigmatism, the image of distant and near objects cannot be focused on the retina (Figure 14.15). Astigmatism is corrected with a cylindrical lens having a curvature that corrects for the corneal astigmatism. The cylindrical lens directs light waves through the astigmatic cornea to focus a single, clear image on the retina.
You will now learn about the retinal neurons and the laminar structure of the retina, and the ways in which the light-sensitive receptors of the eye convert the image projected onto the retina into neural responses. The light sensitive retina forms the innermost layer of the eye (Figure 14.16).
The retina covers the choroid and extends anteriorly to just behind the ciliary body. The retina consists of neurons and supporting cells.
The retina is derived from the neural tube and is, therefore, part of central nervous system. It consists of two parts, the retinal pigment epithelium, which separates the middle, choroid coat of the eyeball from the other innermost component and the neural retina (Figure 14.16) – the dark pigments within the retinal pigment epithelium and choroid coat function to absorb light passing through the receptor layer, thus reducing light scatter and image distortion within the eye. The neural retina contains five types of neurons (Figure 14.17): the visual receptor cells (the rods and cones), the horizontal cells, the bipolar cells, the amacrine cells, and the retinal ganglion cells.
The retina is a laminated structure consisting of alternating layers of cell bodies and cell processes (Figure 14.18).
The innermost layers are located nearest the vitreous chamber, whereas the outermost layers are located adjacent to the retinal pigment epithelium and choroid. The most important layers, progressing from the outer to inner layers, are:

the retinal pigment epithelium, which provides critical metabolic and supportive functions to the photoreceptors;
the receptor layer, which contains the light sensitive outer segments of the photoreceptors;
the outer nuclear layer, which contains the photoreceptor cell bodies;
the outer plexiform layer, where the photoreceptor, horizontal and bipolar cells synapse;
the inner nuclear layer, which contains the horizontal, bipolar and amacrine cell bodies;
the inner plexiform layer, where the bipolar, amacrine and retinal ganglion cells synapse;
the retinal ganglion cell layer, which contains the retinal ganglion cell bodies; and
the optic nerve layer, which contains the ganglion cell axons traveling to the optic disc.
Notice that light passing through the cornea, lens and vitreous must pass through most of the retinal layers before reaching the light-sensitive portion of the photoreceptor; the outer segment in the receptor layer. Notice also that in the region of the fovea where the image of the central visual field center is focused, the retina consists of fewer layers (Figure 14.19): thereby minimizing the obstacles to forming a clear image on the fovea. The area around the fovea, the surrounding macula, is thicker because it contains the cell bodies and processes of retinal neurons receiving information from the receptors in the fovea.

The optic disc is formed by the retinal ganglion cell axons that are exiting the retina. It is located nasal to the fovea (Figure 14.19). This region of the retina is devoid of receptor cells and composed predominantly by the optic nerve layer. Consequently, it is the structural basis for the 'blind spot" in the visual field.
The human has two types of photoreceptors: the rods and cones (Figure 14.20). They are distinguished structurally by the shapes of their outer segments. The photopigments of the rods and cones also differ. The rod outer segment disks contain the photopigment rhodopsin, which absorbs a wide bandwidth of light. The cones differ in the color of light their photopigments absorbs: one type of photopigment absorbs red light, another green light, and a third blue light. As each cone receptor contains only one of the three types of cone photopigment, there are three types of cones; red, green or blue. Each cone responds best to a specific color of light, whereas the rods respond best to white light2. The rod and cone photopigments also differ in illumination sensitivity; rhodopsin breaks down at lower light levels than that required to breakdown cone photopigments. Consequently, the rods are more sensitive - at least at low levels of illumination.
The human visual system has two subsystems that operate at different light energy levels. The scotopic, dark-adapted system operates at low levels of illumination, whereas the photopic, light-adapted system operates at high levels of illumination.
Rods are responsible for the initiation of the scotopic visual process. Rods

contain the photopigment rhodopsin, which breaks down when exposed to a wide bandwidth of light (i.e., it is achromatic).
Rhodopsin is also more sensitive to light and reacts at lower light levels than the color sensitive (chromatic) cone pigments.
have longer outer segments, more outer segment disks and, consequently, contain more photopigment.
are more sensitive to light and function at scotopic (low) levels of illumination.
dominate in the peripheral retina (Figure 14.21A), which is color insensitive, has poor acuity (Figure 14.21B), but is sensitive to low levels of illumination.
Cones are responsible for the initiation of the photopic visual process. Cones

contain photopigments that breakdown in the presence of a limited bandwidth of light (i.e., cone photopigments are chromatic).
are color sensitive.
are less sensitive to light and require high (daylight) illumination levels.
are concentrated in the fovea (Figure 14.21A)
in the fovea have image of the central visual field projected on them.
in the fovea are responsible for photopic, light-adapted vision (i.e., high visual acuity and color vision) in the central visual field (Figure 14.21B).
Biochemical processes in the photoreceptors participate in dark and light adaptation. Notice when you enter a darkened room after spending time in daylight, it takes many minutes before you are able to see objects in the dim light. This slow increase in light sensitivity is called the dark-adaptation process and is related to the rate of regeneration of photopigments and to the intracellular concentration of calcium3. A contrasting, but faster, process occurs in high levels of illumination. When you are fully dark-adapted, exposure to bright light is at first blinding (massive photopigment breakdown and stimulation of photoreceptors) and is followed rapidly by a return of sight. This phenomenon, light adaptation, allows the cone response to dominate over rod responses at high illumination.
The photoreceptors exhibit a fairly high basal release of glutamate. When light strikes the photoreceptor cell, it initiates a biochemical process in the cell that reduces the release of glutamate from its axon terminal. The glutamate, in turn, affects the activity of the bipolar and horizontal cells, which synapse with the photoreceptor. The bipolar cells, in turn, synapse with amacrine and retinal ganglion cells. It is the axons of the retinal ganglion cells that exit the eye as the optic nerve and terminate in the brain. Notice that the direct pathway for the transmission of visual information from the eye to the brain includes only the receptor cell, bipolar cell and ganglion cell. The horizontal cells modulate the synaptic activity of receptor cells and, thereby, indirectly affect the transmission of visual information by bipolar cells. Similarly the amacrine cells modulate the synaptic activity of the retinal bipolar and ganglion cells, thereby affecting the transmission of visual information by the ganglion cells.
Within the outer plexiform layer of the retina, approximately 125 million photoreceptor cells synapse with approximately 10 million bipolar cells. A smaller number of horizontal cells also synapse with the photoreceptor cells within the outer plexiform layer of the retina. The bipolar and horizontal cells respond to the glutamate released by the photoreceptor cells4.

Bipolar cells
do not generate action potentials.
respond to the release of glutamate from photoreceptors with graded potentials (i.e., by hyperpolarizing or depolarizing).
Bipolar cells differ based on their responses to photoreceptor stimulation.

There are at least two types of bipolar cells based on their responses to glutamate.
The off bipolar cells are depolarized by glutamate.
The on bipolar cells are hyperpolarized by glutamate.
The two bipolar cell types have different functional properties.
The off bipolar cells function to detect dark objects in a lighter background.
The on bipolar cells function to detect light objects in a darker background.
The stimulus condition that produces a depolarizing response from a bipolar cell is used to name the bipolar cell type.

An off bipolar cell depolarizes when the photoreceptors that synapse with it are in the dark (i.e., when the light is off, Figure 14.22).
An on bipolar cell depolarizes when the photoreceptors that synapse with are in the light (i.e., when the light is on, Figure 14.22). Note that the depolarization of the on bipolar cell does not result from excitation of the presynaptic cell but rather from a reduction of the inhibitory action ofBipolar Cell Receptive Field: The receptive field of a bipolar cell is defined anatomically by the location and distribution of receptor cells with which it makes synaptic contact.

Each cone bipolar cell makes direct synaptic contact with a circumscribed patch of cone receptors, which may be as few as one foveal cone. Consequently, the receptive fields of bipolar cells synapsing with cones in the fovea are extremely small and are color sensitive. The cone bipolars may be hyperpolarized or depolarized by glutamate and, consequently, may be on-type or off-type bipolar cells.
Each rod bipolar cell may make synaptic contact with a few to fifty or more of rod receptor cells. Consequently, the rod bipolar cell receptive field is relatively large and color insensitive. All rod bipolar cells are hyperpolarized by glutamate and, consequently, are on-type bipolar cells exclusively.
The bipolar cell receptive field is also defined physiologically as the retinal area which when exposed to light produces a response (i.e., depolarization or hyperpolarization) in the bipolar cell.

Bipolar cells have concentric receptive fields. Light directed on the photoreceptor(s) that synapse with a bipolar cell produces a response from the bipolar cell called the center response (Figure 14.23). In contrast, light directed on immediately surrounding receptors produce the opposite response (Figure 14.24).
When both the center and surrounding receptor cells are illuminated with light, the on bipolar cell response to stimulation of the center receptors is reduced by stimulation of the surround receptors (Figure 14.25).
Consequently, the strongest on bipolar cell response is produced when the stimulus is a light spot encircled by a dark ring. For the off bipolar cell, a dark spot encircled by a light ring produces maximal depolarization.
Within the outer plexiform layer, the photoreceptor cells make both presynaptic and postsynaptic contact with horizontal cells.

The horizontal cells have large receptive fields involving
presynaptic (axonal) contact with a small group of photoreceptors and
postsynaptic (dendritic) contact with a larger group of surrounding photoreceptor cells.
By controlling the responses of their “center” photoreceptors (based on the responses of the surrounding photoreceptors), the horizontal cells indirectly produce the bipolar cell receptive field surround effect. The surround effect produced by the horizontal cell is weaker than the center effect.
The surround effect, produced by the horizontal cells, enhances brightness contrasts to produce sharper images, to make an object appear brighter or darker depending on the background and to maintain these contrasts under different illumination levels.
Within the inner plexiform layer, the axon terminals of bipolar cells (the 2° visual afferents) synapse on the dendritic processes of amacrine cells and ganglion cells. As in most neurons, depolarization results in neurotransmitter release by the bipolar cell at its axon terminals. Most bipolar cells release glutamate, which is excitatory to most ganglion cells (i.e., depolarizes ganglion cells). The amacrine cells may synapse with bipolar cells, other amacrine cells or ganglion cells. It is the axons of the retinal ganglion cells (the 3° visual afferents) that exit the eye to form the optic nerve and deliver visual information to the lateral geniculate nucleus of the thalamus and to other diencephalic and midbrain structures.
Ganglion Cell Response Properties. The retinal ganglion cells are the final retinal elements in the direct pathway from the eye to the brain. Because they must carry visual information some distance from the eye, they posses voltage-gated sodium channels in their axonal membranes and generate action potentials when they are depolarized by the glutamate released by the bipolar cells.

The off bipolar cell (Figure 14.27, Right) will depolarize when it is dark on its center cones and will therefore release glutamate when it is dark on the center of its receptive field. This will result in the depolarization of the retinal ganglion cells with which the off bipolar synapses and in the production of action potentials (i.e., discharges) by these ganglion cells (Figure 14.27, Right). Consequently, the retinal ganglion cells that synapse with off bipolar cells will have off-center/on-surround receptive fields and are called off ganglion cells.

The on bipolar cell (Figure 14.28, Left) will depolarize when there is light on its center cones and will therefore release glutamate when it is light on the center of its receptive field. This will result in the depolarization of the retinal ganglion cells with which the on bipolar synapses and in the production of action potentials (i.e., discharges) by these ganglion cells (Figure 14.28, Left). Consequently, the retinal ganglion cells that synapse with on bipolar cells will have on-center/off-surround receptive fields and are called on ganglion cells.

In short, the receptive fields of the bipolar cells with which the retinal ganglion cell synapses determine the receptive field configuration of a retinal ganglion cell.

The retinal ganglion cells provide information important for detecting the shape and movement of objects.

In the primate eye, there are two major types of retinal ganglion cells, Type M and Type P cells, that process information about different stimulus properties.
Type P retinal ganglion cells are color-sensitive object detectors.

The P ganglion cell(s)

outnumber the M-ganglion cells, by approximately 100 to 1 in the primate retina
makes synaptic contact with one to a few cone bipolars that are innervated by cone receptors in the macula fovea
is color sensitive
has a small concentric receptive field
produces a sustained, slowly adapting response that lasts as long as a stimulus is centered on its receptive field.
produces weak responses to stimuli that move across its receptive field.
The slowly adapting response of the Type P retinal ganglion cell is best suited for signaling the presence, color and duration of a visual stimulus and is poor for signaling stimulus movement.

Type M retinal ganglion cells are color-insensitive motion detectors.

The M ganglion cell

is much larger than P ganglion cells
synapses with many bipolar cells
is color insensitive
has a large concentric receptive field
is more sensitive to small center-surround brightness differences
responds with a transient, rapidly adapting response to a maintained stimulus.
responds maximally, with high discharge rates, to stimuli moving across its receptive field.
The rapidly adapting responses of Type M ganglion cells are best suited for signaling temporal variations in, and the movement of, a stimulus.

The axons of the M and P retinal ganglion cells travel in the retina optic nerve fiber layer to the optic disc where they exit the eye. Most of the axons travel to and terminate in the lateral geniculate nucleus of the thalamus.
Amacrine cells synapse with bipolar cells and ganglion cells and are similar to horizontal cells in providing lateral connections between similar types of neurons (e.g., they may connect bipolar cells to other bipolar cells)5. They differ from horizontal cells, however, in also providing ‘’vertical” links between bipolar and ganglion cells.

Amacrine cell types. There are 20 or more types of amacrine cells based on their morphology and neurochemistry. The roles of three types have been identified. One type

is responsible for producing the movement sensitive (rapidly adapting) response of the Type M ganglion cells.
enhances the center-surround effect in ganglion cell receptive fields.
connects rod bipolar cells to cone bipolar cells, thus allowing ganglion cells to respond to the entire range of light levels, from scotopic to photopic.
Low convergence of cones to cone bipolar cells and low convergence of cone bipolar cells to P-retinal ganglion cells produce high visual acuity in the central visual field.

Recall that

visual acuity and color vision are greatest in the central visual field.
the image of the central visual field is projected onto the fovea.
the cones are concentrated in the fovea, whereas the rods predominate in the peripheral retina.
there is low convergence of foveal cones onto macular bipolar cells, as low as one cone receptor to one bipolar cell.
In addition, the cones in the fovea are of smaller diameter than those in the periphery of the retina, which allows for a greater packing density of foveal cones. The high packing density of cones and the low convergence of cones onto bipolar cells in the macula support higher visual acuity in the central visual field. Consequently, the foveal cones, macular bipolar cells and the P-retinal ganglion cells are responsible for photopic, light-adapted vision in the central visual field. In contrast, the higher convergence of the rods onto peripherally located bipolar cells and of peripheral bipolar cells onto amacrine cells forms the basis for the poor visual acuity but high light sensitivity of scotopic vision.
The chemical and physical integrity of the retina is essential for normal visual function. Abnormalities in the blood supply and retinal pigment epithelium result in retinal dysfunctions.

Vitamin A deficiency can cause permanent blindness. An adequate supply of photopigments is necessary to sustain photoreceptors. The supply of all-trans retinal as a photopigment breakdown product is insufficient to maintain adequate photopigment production. Vitamin A can be oxidized into all-trans retinal, and is, therefore, critical in the synthesis of photopigment. In the eye, it is the retinal pigment epithelium that stores vitamin A. The retinal pigment epithelium is also the site of the oxidization of vitamin A into all-trans retinal and conversion of all-trans retinal into 11-cis-retinal. Vitamin A cannot be synthesized by the body and must be ingested. It is found in blood and stored in the liver and retinal pigment epithelium. Vitamin A deficiency, which can result from liver damage (e.g., from alcoholism or hepatitis), produces degeneration of photoreceptors with visual symptoms first presenting as “night blindness” (i.e., extremely poor vision under low illumination).

Retinitis pigmentosa is an inherited disorder in which there is a gradual and progressive failure to maintain the receptor cells. One form involves the production of defective opsin that normally combines with 11-cis retinal to form rhodopsin. Consequently, the rods do not contain sufficient rhodopsin and do not function as the low illumination receptors. A symptom of this condition is “night blindness” and loss of peripheral vision. In this form of retinitis pigmentosa, the cones receptors function normally and central vision remains intact. Other forms of retinitis pigmentosa that affect the cones may progress to destroy central vision.

Macular Degeneration. The leading cause of blindness in the elderly is age-related macular degeneration. The dry form of macular degeneration involves intraocular proliferation of cells in the macular area (i.e., in the fovea and the immediately surrounding retinal areas). In the wet form of macular degeneration, the capillaries of the choroid coat invade the macular area and destroy receptor cells and neurons. In both forms, the visual loss is in the central visual field and the patient will complain of blurred vision and difficulty reading. Laser surgery is the most common treatment for the wet form but has the disadvantage of destroying normal retinal cells. It also may not be effective in preventing cell proliferation following treatment.

Retinal detachment. When the neural retina is torn away from the retinal pigment epithelium (e.g., by a blow to the eye), there is a loss of vision in the area of detachment. The loss of vision results because the neural retina is dependent on the retinal pigment epithelium for 11-cis retinal, nutrients and photoreceptor integrity. The retinal pigment epithelium supplies glucose and essential ions to the neural retina, helps support the photoreceptor cell outer segment, removes outer segment disks shed by the receptor cells, and converts retinol and stores vitamin A for photopigment resynthesis. Lasers may be used to weld the detachment to prevent it from increasing in size. However, the detached and welded areas are functionally blind.

Diabetic retinopathy. The pathological process in diabetic retinopathy involves microaneurysms and punctate hemorrhages in the retina. The tiny swollen blood vessels and/or bleeding in the underlying choroid coat damage the receptor cells and retinal neurons and result in blindness in the regions affected. Lasers may be used to seal swollen and/or leaking blood vessels.

This chapter described the stimulus (light) properties that are important for the visual perception of our external environment, such as color, brightness, color and brightness contrasts (for form perception and visual acuity), visual field representation, binocular fusion and depth perception. Remember that there are regional differences in visual perception: the central visual field is color-sensitive, has high acuity vision and operates at high levels of illumination (i.e., operates with the photopic, light-adapted subsystem). In contrast, the visual field periphery is more sensitive at low levels of illumination, is relatively color insensitive and has poor visual acuity (i.e., operates with the scotopic, dark-adapted, subsystem). The chapter also described how the lens system of the eye produces an image on the retina of light emitted by or reflected off objects in space. The image is a smaller, inverted, and reversed picture of the object. Keep in mind that the image projected onto the retina is, in fact, projected onto a flattened sheet of receptor cells that line the inner surface of the eye. The following chapter will describe the function of the visual receptors and other retinal neurons in converting the visual image into an array of neural activity.

The chapter also reviewed the retinal neurons and the laminar structure of the retina. The image projected onto the retina is distributed over a mosaic of photoreceptors. Light energy projected onto each photoreceptor is converted into receptor membrane potential changes by a process that involves photosensitive pigments and cyclic nucleotide-gated ion channels in the photoreceptor outer segment. The phototransduction process converts light energy into photoreceptor membrane potential changes that produce a chemical signal (the release of glutamate), which results in membrane potential changes in the postsynaptic bipolar and horizontal cells. The receptor substrate for scotopic and photopic vision lies in differences between the rod and cone receptors.

In the primate eye, the information gathered by 125 million receptor cells converges on 10 million bipolar cells, which, in turn, converge on 1 million retinal ganglion cells. The degree of convergence from receptors to bipolar cell and bipolar cells to ganglion cell differs regionally within the retina. In the peripheral retina, the convergence can be fifty or more rod receptors to one bipolar cell, which increases the sensitivity to dim lights but decreases the spatial acuity of the peripheral bipolar cell. In addition, these peripheral bipolar cells are color insensitive. The M-ganglion cells receive input from many peripheral bipolar cells, have large receptive fields, are sensitive to small brightness contrasts and are color insensitive. They also generate transient responses and are uniquely sensitive to changes in illumination levels and movement. In contrast, the bipolar cells in the macula synapse with few foveal cone receptors, which maintain the spatial resolution of the densely packed cones. Such macular bipolar cells have small receptive field centers, are color sensitive but must operate at high illumination levels. Each P-ganglion cell synapses with few macular bipolar cells and is color sensitive, but less sensitive to dim “white” light and to small brightness contrasts. The P ganglion cells have smaller receptive fields than the M ganglion cells and respond with sustained discharges to maintained stimuli. As the M ganglion cells and P ganglion cells respond to different aspects of the visual stimulus, they are described to be encoding and carrying independent, parallel, streams (M-stream and P-stream) of information about stimulus size, color, and movement.
The visual system is unique as much of visual processing occurs outside the brain within the retina of the eye. The previous chapter described how the light-sensitive receptors of the eye convert the image projected onto the retina into spatially distributed neural activity in the first neurons of the visual pathway (i.e., the photoreceptors). Within the retina, the receptors synapse with bipolar and horizontal cells, which establish the basis for brightness and color contrasts. In turn, the bipolar cells (the 2° visual afferent) synapse with retinal ganglion cells and amacrine cells, which enhance contrast effects that support form vision and establish the basis for movement detection. The information from the eye is carried by the axons of the retinal ganglion cells (the 3° visual afferent) to the midbrain and diencephalon. This chapter will provide more information about visual pathway organization and the visual processing that occurs within the brain.
As noted previously in the somatosensory sections, all sensory information must reach the cerebral cortex to be perceived and, with one exception, reach the cortex by way of the thalamus. In the case of the visual system, the thalamic nucleus is the lateral geniculate nucleus and the cortex is the striate cortex of the occipital lobe.
The axons of the 3° visual afferents (the retinal ganglion cells) form the optic nerve fiber layer of the retina on their course to the optic disc. At the optic disc, the 3° visual afferents exit the eye and form the optic nerve. The fibers of the optic nerve that originate from ganglion cells in the nasal half of the retina (i.e., the nasal hemiretina) decussate in the optic chiasm to the opposite optic tract (Figure 15.1). Consequently, each optic tract contains retinal ganglion cell axons that originate in the nasal half of the contralateral retina and the temporal half of the ipsilateral retina. Recall that the ipsilateral temporal hemiretina and the contralateral nasal hemiretina have projected on them the images of corresponding halves of their visual fields. For example, the temporal (left) hemiretina of left eye and the nasal (left) hemiretina of right eye both have projected on them the right halves of their respective visual fields. Consequently, each optic tract has within it axons representing the contralateral half of the visual field.

The axons in the optic tract terminate in four nuclei within the brain (Figure 15.2):

the lateral geniculate nucleus of the thalamus - for visual perception;
the superior colliculus of the midbrain - for control of eye movements;
the pretectum of the midbrain - for control of the pupillary light reflex; and
the suprachiasmatic nucleus of the hypothalamus - for control of diurnal rhythms and hormonal changes.
The vast majority of optic tract fibers terminate on neurons in the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) of the thalamus (Figure 15.3A).

Like the retina, the lateral geniculate nucleus is a laminated structure, in this case, with six principal layers of cells (Figure 15.3B).

The largest cells form the deepest two (magnocellular) layers
Smaller cells form the upper four (parvocellular) layers
Thin layers of the smallest cells (i.e., the koniocellular neurons) are interposed between these principal layers.
The optic tract fibers (3° visual afferents) from each eye synapse in different layers of the LGN. Consequently, each LGN neuron responds to stimulation of one eye only.
The functional properties of LGN neurons are similar to those of retinal ganglion cells.

The LGN neurons are monocular (i.e., respond to stimulation of one eye only) and have concentric (center-surround) receptive fields. The LGN neurons are segregated into three major groups:

The neurons in the magnocellular layers (mLGN cells)
process M-retinal ganglion cell inputs
behave like M-retinal ganglion cells
have relatively large center-surround receptive fields
are color insensitive
are most sensitive to movement of visual stimuli
The neurons in the parvocellular layers (pLGN cells)
process P-retinal ganglion cell inputs
behave like P-retinal ganglion cells
have relatively small center-surround receptive fields
are color sensitive
are well suited for detecting contrasts that form the basis for shape/form discrimination.
A third group, the koniocellular neurons (kLGN)
process P-retinal ganglion cell inputs
behave like P-retinal ganglion cells
have the smallest concentric receptive fields
have stronger color sensitivity than P-retinal ganglion cells
are well suited for detecting colors that aid in shape/form discrimination.
The axons of these different types of LGN neurons terminate in different layers or sublayers of the primary visual cortex.
The primary visual cortical receiving area is in the occipital lobe. The primary visual cortex is characterized by a unique layered appearance in Nissl stained tissue.
Consequently, it is called the striate cortex. It includes the calcarine cortex, which straddles the calcarine fissure, and extends around the occipital pole to include the lateral aspect of the caudal occipital lobe (Figure 15.4, Area 17).
The LGN neurons (4° visual afferents) send their axons in the internal capsule to the occipital lobe where they terminate in the striate cortex (Figure 15.5).

The LGN axons fan out as the optic radiations of the internal capsule and travel through the temporal, parietal and occipital lobes.
The LGN axons in the sublenticular segment of the optic radiations pass below the lenticular nuclei, loop around the inferior horn of the lateral ventricle within the temporal lobe and swing posteriorly to form Meyer’s loop.
Once around the inferior horn, they travel up to the inferior bank of the striate cortex, where they terminate.
The LGN axons in the retrolenticular segment of the internal capsule pass superiorly through the parietal lobe to end in the superior bank of the striate cortex.
The striate cortex (Figure 15.6) is considered to be the primary visual cortex or V1, as

most LGN axons terminate in V1
all V1 neurons respond to visual stimuli exclusively
ablating V1 results in blindness
electrical stimulation of V1 elicits visual sensations.
The striate cortex is involved in the initial cortical processing of all visual information necessary for visual perception and its damage results in loss of vision in the contralesional hemifield.
The color (kLGN), shape (pLGN) and movement (mLGN) information from the thalamus are sent to different neurons within V1 for further processing in V1 and then sent onto different areas of the extrastriate visual cortex.
V1 blob cells: Some V1 cells resemble kLGN neurons. They are

monocular (i.e., respond to stimulation of one eye only).
color sensitive.
characterized by small, concentric receptive fields.
found in clusters (.e., blob cells).
a special target of the kLGN axon terminals.
The P-stream information processed by the V1 blob cells is used in color perception, color discrimination and the learning and memory of the color of objects. The blob cells are the "color" processing cells of V1.

V1 interblob cells: Most V1 interblob cells are

binocular (i.e., respond to stimulation of either eye).
not color sensitive.
characterized by elongated (rectangular-shaped) receptive fields that may or may not have a center-surround type organization.
found around the clusters of color-sensitive V1 blob cells.
exhibit ocular dominance (i.e., respond best to stimulation of a preferred eye).
exhibit orientation specificity (i.e., respond best when the stimulus is oriented in a particular plane).
Location specific V1 interblob cells: One subset of V1 interblob cells responds best when the stimulus is in a specific location of the receptive field (i.e., they also exhibit location specificity).

The P-stream information processed by the V1 interblob cells that exhibit orientation and location specificity but are not motion sensitive is used in object perception, discrimination, learning and memory or in spatial orientation. These interblob cells are the "shape/form" processing cells and the "location" processing cells of V1.

Movement sensitive V1 interblob cells: A second subset of interblob cells respond best to moving stimuli (i.e., exhibit movement sensitivity, Figure 15.8) without a preference for the direction of movement.
Direction specific V1 interblob cells: A third subset displays a preference for movement in a particular direction (i.e., some also exhibit directional sensitivity, Figure 15.9).

The M-stream of information processed by the motion sensitive V1 interblob cells is used to detect object movement and direction/velocity of movement and to guide eye movements. These motion-sensitive interblob cells are the "motion detecting” cells of V1.

Extrastriate Visual Cortex. The extrastriate cortex includes all of the occipital lobe areas surrounding the primary visual cortex (Figure 15.4, Areas 18 & 19). The extrastriate cortex in non-human primates has been subdivided into as many as three functional areas, V2, V3, and V4. The primary visual cortex, V1, sends input to extrastriate cortex and to visual association cortex. The information from the “color”, “shape/form”, "location" and “motion” detecting V1, neurons are sent to different areas of the extrastriate cortex (Figure 15.10).

Damage to extrastriate cortex does not result in a “simple loss of vision”; rather it results in higher order visual perceptual deficits including the failure to recognize objects, colors and/or movement of objects.
Visual Association Cortex. The visual association cortex extends anteriorly from the extrastriate cortex to encompass adjacent areas of the posterior parietal lobe and much of the posterior temporal lobe (Figure 15.4, Areas 7, 20, 37 & 39). In most cases, these areas receive visual input via the extrastriate cortex, which sends color, shape/form, location and motion information to different areas of the visual association cortex (Figure 15.10).

The Dorsal Stream: The neurons in the parietal association cortex and superior and middle temporal visual association cortex (Areas 7 and 39 and the superior part of Area 37 in Figure 15.4) have binocular receptive fields and process P-channel information about object location and M-channel information about object movement.

These dorsally located visual association neurons are responsible for producing our sense of

spatial orientation
binocular fusion/depth perception
the location, the movement and the movement direction and velocity of objects in space.
The dorsal stream processes information about the “where” of the visual stimulus (Figure 15.10).

Damage the dorsal visual association cortex results in deficits in spatial orientation, motion detection and in guidance of visual tracking eye movements.

The Ventral Stream: The neurons in the inferior temporal visual association cortex (Area 20 and the inferior part of Areas 37 & 39 in Figure 15.4) process P-channel information about object color and form.

These ventrally located visual association neurons are responsible for processing information necessary for our abilities to

recognize objects and colors
read text and
learn and remember visual objects (e.g., words and their meanings)
This ventral stream processes information about the “what” of the visual stimulus (Figure 15.10).

Damage to the inferior visual association cortex produces deficits in complex visual perception tasks, attention and learning/memory.

The topographic (spatial) relationships of retinal neurons are maintained throughout the visual system, which preserves the retinotopic map of the visual world. That is, the retina is mapped onto the LGN and striate cortex in an organized (topographic) fashion. Consequently, neighboring parts of retina project to neighboring parts of LGN and neighboring parts of LGN project to neighboring parts of the striate cortex. This retinotopic organization in the visual pathway results in a spatial representation of the visual field in the LGN and visual cortex.

You should recall the following regarding the spatial representation of the retinal image within the visual pathway.

The optic image on the retina is upside-down and left-right reversed.
The monocular visual fields of the two eyes overlap partially to form the binocular visual field .
The temporal hemiretina of one eye and the nasal hemiretina of the other eye have projected on them the images of corresponding halves of their visual fields (Figure 15.1). For example, the temporal (left) hemiretina of left eye and the nasal (left) hemiretina of right eye both have projected on them the right half of the visual fields of each eye.
Beyond the optic chiasm, the corresponding visual hemifields of the two eyes are represented in the contralateral side of the visual pathway (Figure 15.1). For example, the left hemifield of both eyes are represented in the right optic tract, right lateral geniculate nucleus, right optic radiations and right striate cortex.
The fibers of the optic radiation fan out into the temporal, parietal and occipital lobes on their course to the striate cortex. Those forming the sublenticular optic radiations carry information about the superior hemifield, whereas those forming the retrolenticular optic radiations carry information about the inferior hemifield (Figure 15.5). The optic radiation fibers traveling the most direct course back to the striate cortex carry information about the central visual field.
There are many more receptor cells in the fovea and many more bipolar and ganglion cells in the macula than in the periphery of the retina. Consequently, the central visual field is disproportionately represented in the visual system. That is, more visual receptors, more optic nerve fibers and more LGN and cortical neurons are involved in processing and carrying information about that portion of the retinal image representing the center of the visual field.

The topographic (spatial) relationships of retinal neurons are maintained throughout the visual system, which preserves the retinotopic map of the visual world. That is, the retina is mapped onto the LGN and striate cortex in an organized (topographic) fashion. Consequently, neighboring parts of retina project to neighboring parts of LGN and neighboring parts of LGN project to neighboring parts of the striate cortex. This retinotopic organization in the visual pathway results in a spatial representation of the visual field in the LGN and visual cortex.

Spatial Representation of the Retinal Image

You should recall the following regarding the spatial representation of the retinal image within the visual pathway.

The optic image on the retina is upside-down and left-right reversed.
The monocular visual fields of the two eyes overlap partially to form the binocular visual field .
The temporal hemiretina of one eye and the nasal hemiretina of the other eye have projected on them the images of corresponding halves of their visual fields (Figure 15.1). For example, the temporal (left) hemiretina of left eye and the nasal (left) hemiretina of right eye both have projected on them the right half of the visual fields of each eye.
Beyond the optic chiasm, the corresponding visual hemifields of the two eyes are represented in the contralateral side of the visual pathway (Figure 15.1). For example, the left hemifield of both eyes are represented in the right optic tract, right lateral geniculate nucleus, right optic radiations and right striate cortex.
The fibers of the optic radiation fan out into the temporal, parietal and occipital lobes on their course to the striate cortex. Those forming the sublenticular optic radiations carry information about the superior hemifield, whereas those forming the retrolenticular optic radiations carry information about the inferior hemifield (Figure 15.5). The optic radiation fibers traveling the most direct course back to the striate cortex carry information about the central visual field.
There are many more receptor cells in the fovea and many more bipolar and ganglion cells in the macula than in the periphery of the retina. Consequently, the central visual field is disproportionately represented in the visual system. That is, more visual receptors, more optic nerve fibers and more LGN and cortical neurons are involved in processing and carrying information about that portion of the retinal image representing the center of the visual field.

Figure 15,11 illustrates perimetry test results for the two eyes of someone with normal vision. The bottom panel of Figure 15.11 is a simplified illustration of the monocular visual fields used in the following examples of visual field defects. A visual field defect provides clues to the structure(s) affected. That is, the area(s) of visual field loss and eye(s) exhibiting the visual field loss offer clues about the site of the damage. The following examples of visual field losses should help you determine how well you can utilize what you have learned thus far about the visual system.

Symptoms: The patient is having his semiannual physical examination. As he is diabetic, the physician examines his retinas and performs a confrontation test of his visual fields. An abnormality is detected in his left fundus (Figure 15.12) but the confrontational field test detects nothing.

Perimetry testing is requested.

Perimetry Test Results: The results indicate the right eye's visual field is normal and that there is peripheral a scotoma (i.e., loss of vision that does not follow the boundaries of the visual field quadrants) in the left eye's temporal hemifield (Figure 15.13).
Side & Retinotopicity of damage: The visual loss

is limited to the left eye
is in the temporal (left) hemifield
is associated with retinal abnormalities in the nasal hemiretina of the left eye
So you conclude that the visual defect involves

retinal damage in the left eye
damage located in the nasal half of the left retina (Figure 15.14, Lesion 1)
damage related to the patient's diabetes - diabetic retinopathy.

Retinal Damage: A defect involving only the visual field of one eye indicates possible damage in the retina or optic nerve. If the visual loss is confined to one eye, it is called a monocular visual field defect. Often retinal lesions are small and do not follow the boundaries of the visual field quadrants. Such a visual field disorder is called a scotoma. A retinal visual field defect is most severe when vision in the central field is affected, as in the case of macular degeneration. In macular degeneration, the patient will report difficulty reading and seeing clearly and visual field testing will demonstrate that the patient has a central scotoma (i.e., is blind in the visual field center).

Symptoms: The patient complains of a sudden headache and loss of vision in his left eye. Ophthalmoscope examination does not reveal abnormalities in the left eye1. However, confrontation testing indicates a severe loss of vision in the left eye.

The patient is referred for immediate neuroradiographic tests and perimetry testing.

Perimetry Test Results: The results indicate the right eye's visual field is normal and that there is a large visual loss encompassing nearly all of the left eye's visual field (Figure 15.15).

Side & Retinotopicity of damage: The visual loss

does not appear to relate to changes in the retina of the left eye,
is limited to the left eye,
encompasses nearly the entire the visual field of the left eye.
So, you conclude that the visual defect is

retrobulbar (beyond the retina or eye) (Figure 15.14, Lesion 2),
probably limited to optic nerve damage (only one eye affected).
Neural imaging results indicate an aneurysm on the left ophthalmic artery, which is compressing the left optic nerve (Figure 15.16). Compression of the nerve prevents action potentials from the retina to travel to the lateral geniculate nucleus of the thalamus. Long-term compression may damage the nerve, however, of greater concern is the potential rupture of the aneurysm, which could cause extensive brain damage.
Optic Nerve Damage: Each optic nerve contains the axons of retinal ganglion cells from one eye, e.g., the right nerve from the right eye. Damage to one optic nerve will produce a monocular visual field defect. Destruction of one optic nerve (e.g., crushed by a tumor on the orbital surface of the frontal cortex) will result in the total loss of vision in the ipsilesional eye.

Symptoms: At his annual physical exam, the patient complains of a general malaise and changes in his vision that he noticed while playing soccer. He said he was often "blindsided" on the playing field because he "couldn't see players approaching him from the side". Ophthalmoscope examination does not reveal abnormalities in either eye2. Confrontation field testing indicates a constriction of the temporal hemifields of both eyes. The patient is referred for neuroradiographic tests and perimetry testing.

Perimetry Test Results: The results indicate a bitemporal hemianopia, i.e., loss of vision in the temporal hemifields of both eyes (Figure 15.17).

Side & Retinotopicity of damage: The visual loss

is not related to changes in the retina of either eye,
involves vision in both eyes,
encompasses only the temporal hemifields.
You conclude that the visual field defect is related to damage that

is retrobulbar (beyond the retina),
involves the optic chiasm (Figure 15.14, Lesion 3).
Neural imaging results (Figure 15.18) indicate a pituitary adenoma that is compressing the optic chiasm. Compression of the decussating nerve fibers prevents action potentials from the nasal hemiretina to reach the contralateral lateral geniculate nucleus of the thalamus. As the tumor grows larger it will crush the optic chiasm, destroying it and eventually compromising the remaining optic nerve fibers.

Optic Chiasm Damage: The fibers of the optic nerve that originate from ganglion cells in the nasal half of the retina decussate in the optic chiasm to the opposite optic tract (Figure 15.1). The crossing fibers of the optic chiasm may be crushed by a pituitary tumor. Damage to the optic chiasm produces a unique form of visual field deficit, a bitemporal hemianopia (Figure 15.17). Recall that the fibers of the optic chiasm carry information about objects in the temporal hemifields of both eyes (i.e., the right hemifield of the right eye and the left hemifield of the left eye). Consequently section of the optic chiasm produces a visual loss in only the temporal half of the visual field of each eye. When the patient views the world out of both eyes, the boundary of his binocular visual field is narrower than normal.

Symptoms: A patient is brought to the emergency room complaining of a severe headache and nausea. He is conscious and coherent when examined in the ER. Ophthalmoscope examination does not reveal abnormalities in either eye. Confrontation field testing indicates a visual loss in the right hemifield of both eyes.

The patient is referred for neuroradiographic tests and perimetry testing.

Perimetry Test Results: The results indicate a right homonymous hemianopia with macular sparing (Figure 15.19).
Side & Retinotopicity of damage: The visual loss

is not related to changes in the retina of either eye,
involves field losses for both eyes,
involves the right hemifields,
is homonymous or congruent,
spares the central visual field.
You conclude that the visual field defect is related to damage that

is retrobulbar (beyond the retina),
is retrochiasmatic or postchiasmatic (beyond the optic chiasm),
involves the left calcarine cortex,
may involve hemorrhage from a branch of the left posterior cerebral artery,
spared the more caudal and lateral parts of the striate cortex, which receives collateral blood flow from branches of the middle cerebral artery.
Neural imaging results indicate injury to the rostral half of the left calcarine cortex, which receives blood from the left posterior cerebral artery (Figure 15.20). Recall that the rostral calcarine cortex processes information from the visual field periphery, whereas the caudal and lateral striate cortex process information derived from the visual field center.
Calcarine Cortex Damage. An infarct created by obstruction of, or a hemorrhage in, branches of the posterior cerebral artery may result in damage to the rostral calcarine cortex. Damage to the calcarine cortex on one side may produce a binocular, contralateral homonymous hemianopia with macular sparing (Figure 15.20). A collateral blood supply from branches of the middle cerebral artery is believed to spare the cortical neurons in the caudal and lateral regions of the striate cortex, which receive information from the macular area.

Symptoms: A patient, who is stabilized after suffering a stroke two months earlier, is referred to a neuro-ophthalmologist for evaluation. The patient does not appear to be blind but has problems with processing visual information. For example, the patient cannot describe the color of an object presented to him or recognize faces. He has normal spatial orientation and motion detection.

The patient is referred for perimetry testing.

Perimetry Test Results: The results indicate no consistent loss of vision. However, it is difficult to obtain consistent results because the patient tires easily and his attention appears to wander.

Side & Retinotopicity of damage: The patient

is not blind in either eye,
does not have deficits in detecting the location or movement of objects,
does not exhibit the symptom of "neglect" (i.e., visual inattention),
exhibits deficits in higher visual processing involving color and object recognition.
You conclude that the neurological defect is

not related to damage in the visual pathway from the eye to the striate cortex,
not related to damage in the middle or superior temporal gyrus,
not related to damage in the parietal lobe,
related to damage in the inferior temporal gyrus (Figure 15.21),
involving branches of the posterior cerebral artery that supply the inferior temporal gyri.
Neural imaging results indicate damage to the caudal portion of the inferior temporal lobe, which normally receives blood from branches of the posterior cerebral artery.

Extrastriate or Association Cortex Damage: While destruction of the primary visual cortex produces blindness in the contralesional hemifield, damage to cortical areas surrounding the striate cortex does not Instead, they may produce profound deficits in the higher order-processing of visual information. For example, bilateral damage to a small area of the inferior temporal gyrus (Figure 15.21) produces a loss in the ability to recognize faces. Damage to more superior areas of the temporal lobe (area 39 in Figure 15.4) produces an inability to recognize or comprehend written words and/or passages. Damage to areas in the parietal cortex may result in the inability to see motion (i.e., a moving object will be seen in “frames’’ in one place at one point in time and at another place in a following period of time). The object does not appear to move; rather it appears to have jumped from one place to the next. Damage to large areas involving the posterior parietal cortex and superior temporal cortex may result in the symptom of "neglect", wherein objects in parts of the visual field are ignored or denied existence.
In this chapter, you have learned how the visual system is organized in the brain. You have learned that stimulus features extracted by the retinal neurons (color, brightness contrast, movement) are kept segregated in separate “information channels” and processed in parallel by different cells at all levels of the visual system. Information coded and carried by one million retinal ganglion cells are distributed to hundreds of millions of cortical neurons in the occipital, parietal and temporal lobes. The perception of a coherent visual image is recomposed out of these fragments of information by the simultaneous activation of large areas of cortex. You have also learned how the spatial representation of the visual image is maintained by the retinotopic organization of the visual system and learned how this information is useful in determining the location and extent of damage to the visual system by examining the visual fields. Finally, you have learned that neuronal responses in visual cortex exhibit plasticity at different time scales, short term (as adaptation and dynamics) and long term (as learning) – this plasticity allows visual cortex to construct an accurate picture of the world that can rapidly adapt to match the changes in the environment.

Much of the brain and nervous system is devoted to the processing of sensory input, in order to construct detailed representations of the external environment.

Through vision, audition, somatosensation, and the other senses, we perceive the world and our relationship to it. This elaborate processing would be of limited value, however, unless we had a way to act upon the environment that we are sensing, whether that action consist of running away from a predator; seeking shelter against the rain; searching for food when one is hungry; moving one’s lips and vocal cords in order to communicate with others; or performing the countless other varieties of actions that make up our daily lives. In some cases the relationship between the sensory input and the motor output are simple and direct; for example, touching a hot stove elicits an immediate withdrawal of the hand (Figure 1.1). Usually, however, our conscious actions require not only sensory input but a host of other cognitive processes that allow us to choose the most appropriate motor output for the given circumstances. In each case, the final output is a set of commands to certain muscles in the body to exert force against some other object or forces (e.g., gravity). This entire process falls under the subject of motor control.

Volition. The motor system must generate movements that are adaptive and that accomplish the goals of the organism. These goals are evaluated and set by high-order areas of the brain. The motor system must transform the goals into the appropriate activations of muscles to perform the desired movements.
Coordination of signals to many muscle groups. Few movements are restricted to the activation of a single muscle. For example, the act of moving your hand from inside your pocket to a position in front of you requires the coordinated activity of the shoulder, elbow, and wrist. Making the same movement while removing a 2-lb weight from your pocket may result in the same trajectory of your hand, but will require different sets of forces on the muscles that make the movement. The task of the motor system is to determine the necessary forces and coordination at each joint in order to produce the final, smooth motion of the arm.
Proprioception. In order to make a desired movement (e.g., raising your hand to ask a question), it is essential for the motor system to know the starting position of the hand. Raising one’s hand from a resting position on a desk, compared to a resting position on top of the head, results in the same final position of the arm, but these two movements require different patterns of muscle activation. The motor system has a set of sensory inputs (called proprioceptors) that inform it of the length of muscles and the forces being applied to them; it uses this information to calculate joint position and other variables necessary to make the appropriate movement.
Postural adjustments. The motor system must constantly produce postural adjustments in order to compensate for changes in the body’s center of mass as we move our limbs, head, and torso. Without these automatic adjustments, the simple act of reaching for a cup would cause us to fall, as the body’s center of mass shifts to a location in front of the body axis.
Sensory feedback. In addition to the use of proprioception to sense the position of the body before a movement, the motor system must use other sensory information in order to perform the movement accurately. By comparing desired activity with actual activity, sensory feedback allows for corrections in movements as they take place, and it also allows modifications to motor programs so that future movements are performed more accurately.
Compensation for the physical characteristics of the body and muscles. To exert a defined force on an object, it is not sufficient to know only the characteristics of the object (e.g., its mass, size, etc.). The motor system must account for the physical characteristics of the body and muscles themselves. The bones and muscles have mass that must be considered when moving a joint, and the muscles themselves have a certain degree of resistance to movement.
Unconscious processing. The motor system must perform many procedures in an automatic fashion, without the need for high-order control. Imagine if walking across the room required thinking about planting the foot at each step, paying attention to the movement of each muscle in the leg and making sure that the appropriate forces and contraction speeds are taking place. It would be hard to do anything else but that one task. Instead, many motor tasks are performed in an automatic fashion that does not require conscious processing. For example, many of the postural adjustments that the body makes during movement are performed without our awareness. These unconscious processes allow higher-order brain areas to concern themselves with broad desires and goals, rather than low-level implementations of movements.
Adaptability. The motor system must adapt to changing circumstances. For example, as a child grows and its body changes, different constraints are placed on the motor system in terms of the size and mass of bones and muscles. The motor commands that work to raise the hand of an infant would fail completely to raise the hand of an adult. The system must adapt over time to change its output to accomplish the same goals. Furthermore, if the system were unable to adapt, we would never be able to acquire motor skills, such as playing a piano, hitting a baseball, or performing microsurgery.
These are some of the many components of the motor system that allow us to perform complex movements in a seemingly effortless way. The brain has evolved exceedingly complex and sophisticated mechanisms to perform these tasks, and researchers have only scratched the surface in understanding the principles that underlie the brain’s control of movement.

Volition. The motor system must generate movements that are adaptive and that accomplish the goals of the organism. These goals are evaluated and set by high-order areas of the brain. The motor system must transform the goals into the appropriate activations of muscles to perform the desired movements.
Coordination of signals to many muscle groups. Few movements are restricted to the activation of a single muscle. For example, the act of moving your hand from inside your pocket to a position in front of you requires the coordinated activity of the shoulder, elbow, and wrist. Making the same movement while removing a 2-lb weight from your pocket may result in the same trajectory of your hand, but will require different sets of forces on the muscles that make the movement. The task of the motor system is to determine the necessary forces and coordination at each joint in order to produce the final, smooth motion of the arm.
Proprioception. In order to make a desired movement (e.g., raising your hand to ask a question), it is essential for the motor system to know the starting position of the hand. Raising one’s hand from a resting position on a desk, compared to a resting position on top of the head, results in the same final position of the arm, but these two movements require different patterns of muscle activation. The motor system has a set of sensory inputs (called proprioceptors) that inform it of the length of muscles and the forces being applied to them; it uses this information to calculate joint position and other variables necessary to make the appropriate movement.
Postural adjustments. The motor system must constantly produce postural adjustments in order to compensate for changes in the body’s center of mass as we move our limbs, head, and torso. Without these automatic adjustments, the simple act of reaching for a cup would cause us to fall, as the body’s center of mass shifts to a location in front of the body axis.
Sensory feedback. In addition to the use of proprioception to sense the position of the body before a movement, the motor system must use other sensory information in order to perform the movement accurately. By comparing desired activity with actual activity, sensory feedback allows for corrections in movements as they take place, and it also allows modifications to motor programs so that future movements are performed more accurately.
Compensation for the physical characteristics of the body and muscles. To exert a defined force on an object, it is not sufficient to know only the characteristics of the object (e.g., its mass, size, etc.). The motor system must account for the physical characteristics of the body and muscles themselves. The bones and muscles have mass that must be considered when moving a joint, and the muscles themselves have a certain degree of resistance to movement.
Unconscious processing. The motor system must perform many procedures in an automatic fashion, without the need for high-order control. Imagine if walking across the room required thinking about planting the foot at each step, paying attention to the movement of each muscle in the leg and making sure that the appropriate forces and contraction speeds are taking place. It would be hard to do anything else but that one task. Instead, many motor tasks are performed in an automatic fashion that does not require conscious processing. For example, many of the postural adjustments that the body makes during movement are performed without our awareness. These unconscious processes allow higher-order brain areas to concern themselves with broad desires and goals, rather than low-level implementations of movements.
Adaptability. The motor system must adapt to changing circumstances. For example, as a child grows and its body changes, different constraints are placed on the motor system in terms of the size and mass of bones and muscles. The motor commands that work to raise the hand of an infant would fail completely to raise the hand of an adult. The system must adapt over time to change its output to accomplish the same goals. Furthermore, if the system were unable to adapt, we would never be able to acquire motor skills, such as playing a piano, hitting a baseball, or performing microsurgery.
These are some of the many components of the motor system that allow us to perform complex movements in a seemingly effortless way. The brain has evolved exceedingly complex and sophisticated mechanisms to perform these tasks, and researchers have only scratched the surface in understanding the principles that underlie the brain’s control of movement.

The ease with which we make most of our movements belies the enormous sophistication and complexity of the motor system. Engineers have spent decades trying to make machines perform simple tasks that we take for granted, yet the most advanced robotic systems do not come close to emulating the precision and smoothness of movement, under all types of conditions, that we achieve effortlessly and automatically. How does the brain do it? Although many of the details are not understood, two broad principles appear to be key concepts toward understanding motor control:

Functional Segregation. The motor system is divided into a number of different areas that control different aspects of movement (a “divide and conquer” strategy). These areas are located throughout the nervous system. One of the key questions of research on motor control is to understand the functional roles played by each area.
Hierarchical Organization. The different areas of the motor system are organized in a hierarchical fashion. The higher-order areas can concern themselves with more global tasks regarding action, such as deciding when to act, devising an appropriate sequence of actions, and coordinating the activity of many limbs. They do not have to program the exact force and velocity of individual muscles, or coordinate movements with changes in posture; these low-level tasks are performed by the lower levels of the hierarchy.
The motor system hierarchy consists of 4 levels (Figure 1.2): the spinal cord, the brain stem, the motor cortex, and the association cortex. It also contains two side loops: the basal ganglia and the cerebellum, which interact with the hierarchy through connections with the thalamus.

The spinal cord is the first level of the motor hierarchy. It is the site where motor neurons are located. It is also the site of many interneurons and complex neural circuits that perform the “nuts and bolts” processing of motor control. These circuits execute the low-level commands that generate the proper forces on individual muscles and muscle groups to enable adaptive movements. The spinal cord also contains complex circuitry for such rhythmic behaviors as walking. Because this low level of the hierarchy takes care of these basic functions, higher levels (such as the motor cortex) can process information related to the planning of movements, the construction of adaptive sequences of movements, and the coordination of whole-body movements, without having to encode the precise details of each muscle contraction.
Alpha motor neurons (also called lower motor neurons) innervate skeletal muscle and cause the muscle contractions that generate movement. Motor neurons release the neurotransmitter acetylcholine at a synapse called the neuromuscular junction. When the acetylcholine binds to acetylcholine receptors on the muscle fiber, an action potential is propagated along the muscle fiber in both directions (see Chapter 4 of Section I for review). The action potential triggers the contraction of the muscle. If the ends of the muscle are fixed, keeping the muscle at the same length, then the contraction results on an increased force on the supports (isometric contraction). If the muscle shortens against no resistance, the contraction results in constant force (isotonic contraction). The motor neurons that control limb and body movements are located in the anterior horn of the spinal cord, and the motor neurons that control head and facial movements are located in the motor nuclei of the brainstem. Even though the motor system is composed of many different types of neurons scattered throughout the CNS, the motor neuron is the only way in which the motor system can communicate with the muscles. Thus, all movements ultimately depend on the activity of lower motor neurons. The famous physiologist Sir Charles Sherrington referred to these motor neurons as the “final common pathway” in motor processing.
Motor neurons are not merely the conduits of motor commands generated from higher levels of the hierarchy. They are themselves components of complex circuits that perform sophisticated information processing. As shown in Figure 1.3, motor neurons have highly branched, elaborate dendritic trees, enabling them to integrate the inputs from large numbers of other neurons and to calculate proper outputs.

Two terms are used to describe the anatomical relationship between motor neurons and muscles: the motor neuron pool and the motor unit.

Motor neurons are clustered in columnar, spinal nuclei called motor neuron pools (or motor nuclei). All of the motor neurons in a motor neuron pool innervate a single muscle (Figure 1.4), and all motor neurons that innervate a particular muscle are contained in the same motor neuron pool. Thus, there is a one-to-one relationship between a muscle and a motor neuron pool.
Each individual muscle fiber in a muscle is innervated by one, and only one, motor neuron (make sure you understand the difference between a muscle and a muscle fiber). A single motor neuron, however, can innervate many muscle fibers. The combination of an individual motor neuron and all of the muscle fibers that it innervates is called a motor unit. The number of fibers innervated by a motor unit is called its innervation ratio.
If a muscle is required for fine control or for delicate movements (e.g., movement of the fingers or hands), its motor units will tend to have small innervation ratios. That is, each motor neuron will innervate a small number of muscle fibers (10-100), enabling many nuances of movement of the entire muscle. If a muscle is required only for coarse movements (e.g., a thigh muscle), its motor units will tend to have a high innervation ratio (i.e., each motor neuron innervating 1000 or more muscle fibers), as there is no necessity for individual muscle fibers to undergo highly coordinated, differential contractions to produce a fine movement.
A motor neuron controls the amount of force that is exerted by muscle fibers. There are two principles that govern the relationship between motor neuron activity and muscle force: the rate code and the size principle.

Rate Code. Motor neurons use a rate code to signal the amount of force to be exerted by a muscle. An increase in the rate of action potentials fired by the motor neuron causes an increase in the amount of force that the motor unit generates. This code is illustrated in Figure 1.5. When the motor neuron fires a single action potential (Play 1), the muscle twitches slightly, and then relaxes back to its resting state. If the motor neuron fires after the muscle has returned to baseline, then the magnitude of the next muscle twitch will be the same as the first twitch. However, if the rate of firing of the motor neuron increases, such that a second action potential occurs before the muscle has relaxed back to baseline, then the second action potential produces a greater amount of force than the first (i.e., the strength of the muscle contraction summates) (Play 2). With increasing firing rates, the summation grows stronger, up to a limit. When the successive action potentials no longer produce a summation of muscle contraction (because the muscle is at its maximum state of contraction), the muscle is in a state called tetanus (Play 3).

Size Principle. When a signal is sent to the motor neurons to execute a movement, motor neurons are not all recruited at the same time or at random. The motor neuron size principle states that, with increasing strength of input onto motor neurons, smaller motor neurons are recruited and fire action potentials before larger motor neurons are recruited. Why does this orderly recruitment occur? Recall the relationship between voltage, current, and resistance (Ohm’s Law): V = IR. Because smaller motor neurons have a smaller membrane surface area, they have fewer ion channels, and therefore a larger input resistance. Larger motor neurons have more membrane surface and correspondingly more ion channels; therefore, they have a smaller input resistance. Because of Ohm’s Law, a small amount of synaptic current will be sufficient to cause the membrane potential of a small motor neuron to reach firing threshold, while the large motor neuron stays below threshold. As the amount of current increases, the membrane potential of the larger motor neuron also increases, until it also reaches firing threshold.
Figure 1，6 demonstrates how the size principle governs the amount of force generated by a muscle. Because motor units are recruited in an orderly fashion, weak inputs onto motor neurons will cause only a few motor units to be active, resulting in a small force exerted by the muscle (Play 1). With stronger inputs, more motor neurons will be recruited, resulting in more force applied to the muscle (Play 2 and Play 3). Moreover, different types of muscle fibers are innervated by small and larger motor neurons. Small motor neurons innervate slow-twitch fibers; intermediate-sized motor neurons innervate fast-twitch, fatigue-resistant fibers; and large motor neurons innervate fast-twitch, fatigable muscle fibers. The slow-twitch fibers generate less force than the fast-twitch fibers, but they are able to maintain these levels of force for long periods. These fibers are used for maintaining posture and making other low-force movements. Fast-twitch, fatigue-resistant fibers are recruited when the input onto motor neurons is large enough to recruit intermediate-sized motor neurons. These fibers generate more force than slow-twitch fibers, but they are not able to maintain the force as long as the slow-twitch fibers. Finally, fast-twitch, fatigable fibers are recruited when the largest motor neurons are activated. These fibers produce large amounts of force, but they fatigue very quickly. They are used when the organism must generate a burst of large amounts of force, such as in an escape mechanism. Most muscles contain both fast- and slow-twitch fibers, but in different proportions. Thus, the white meat of a chicken, used to control the wings, is composed primarily of fast-twitch fibers, whereas the dark meat, used to maintain balance and posture, is composed primarily of slow-twitch fibers.
The motor system requires sensory input in order to function properly. In addition to sensory information about the external environment, the motor system also requires sensory information about the current state of the muscles and limbs themselves. Proprioception is the sense of the body’s position in space based on specialized receptors that reside in the muscles and tendons. The muscle spindle signals the length of a muscle and changes in the length of a muscle. The Golgi tendon organ signals the amount of force being applied to a muscle.
Muscle spindles are collections of 6-8 specialized muscle fibers that are located within the muscle mass itself (Figure 1.7). These fibers do not contribute significantly to the force generated by the muscle. Rather, they are specialized receptors that signal (a) the length and (b) the rate of change of length (velocity) of the muscle. Because of the fusiform shape of the muscle spindle, these fibers are referred to as intrafusal fibers. The large majority of muscle fibers that allow the muscle to do work are termed extrafusal fibers. Each muscle contains many muscle spindles; muscles that are necessary for fine movements contain more spindles than muscles that are used for posture or coarse movements.
There are 3 types of muscle spindle fibers, characterized by their shape and the type of information they convey (Figure 1.8).

Nuclear Chain fibers. These fibers are so-named because their nuclei are aligned in a single row (chain) in the center of the fiber. They signal information about the static length of the muscle.
Static Nuclear Bag fibers. These fibers are so-named because their nuclei are collected in a bundle in the middle of the fiber. Like the nuclear chain fiber, these fibers signal information about the static length of a muscle.
Dynamic Nuclear Bag fibers. These fibers are anatomically similar to the static nuclear bag fibers, but they signal primarily information about the rate of change (velocity) of muscle length.
A typical muscle spindle is composed of 1 dynamic nuclear bag fiber, 1 static nuclear bag fiber, and ~5 nuclear chain fibers.
Because the muscle spindle is located in parallel with the extrafusal fibers, it will stretch along with the muscle. The muscle spindle signals muscle length and velocity to the CNS through two types of specialized sensory fibers that innervate the intrafusal fibers. These sensory fibers have stretch receptors that open and close as a function of the length of the intrafusal fiber.

Group Ia afferents (also called primary afferents) wrap around the central portion of all 3 types of intrafusal fibers; these specialized endings are called annulospiral endings. Because they innervate all 3 types of intrafusal fibers, Group Ia afferents provide information about both length and velocity.
Group II afferents (also called secondary afferents) innervate the ends of the nuclear chain fibers and the static nuclear bag fibers at specialized junctions termed flower spray endings. Because they do not innervate the dynamic nuclear bag fibers, Group II afferents signal information about muscle length only.
Because of their patterns of innervation onto the three types of intrafusal fibers, Group Ia and Group II afferents respond differently to different types of muscle movements. Figure 1.9 shows the responses of each type of afferent to a linear stretch of the muscle. Initially, both Group Ia and Group II fibers fire at a certain rate, encoding the current length of the muscle. During the stretch, the two types differ in their responses. The Group Ia afferent fires at a very high rate during the stretch, encoding the velocity of the muscle length; at the end of the stretch, its firing decreases, as the muscle is no longer changing length. Note, however, that its firing rate is still higher than it was before the stretch, as it is now encoding the new length of the muscle. Compare the response of the Group Ia afferent to the Group II afferent. The Group II afferent increases its firing rate steadily as the muscle is stretched. Its firing rate does not depend on the rate of change of the muscle; rather, its firing rate depends only on the immediate length of the muscle.
Although intrafusal fibers do not contribute significantly to muscle contraction, they do have contractile elements at their ends that are innervated by motor neurons.
Motor neurons are divided into two groups. Alpha motor neurons innervate extrafusal fibers, the highly contracting fibers that supply the muscle with its power. Gamma motor neurons innervate intrafusal fibers, which contract only slightly. The function of intrafusal fiber contraction is not to provide force to the muscle; rather, gamma activation of the intrafusal fiber is necessary to keep the muscle spindle taut, and therefore sensitive to stretch, over a wide range of muscle lengths. This concept is illustrated in Figure 1.10. If a resting muscle is stretched, the muscle spindle becomes stretched in parallel, sending signals through the primary and secondary afferents. A subsequent contraction of the muscle, however, removes the pull on the spindle, and it becomes slack, causing the spindle afferents to cease firing. If the muscle were to be stretched again, the muscle spindle would not be able to signal this stretch. Thus, the spindle is rendered temporarily insensitive to stretch after the muscle has contracted. Activation of gamma motor neurons prevents this temporary insensitivity by causing a weak contraction of the intrafusal fibers, in parallel with the contraction of the muscle. This contraction keeps the spindle taut at all times and maintains its sensitivity to changes in the length of the muscle. Thus, when the CNS instructs a muscle to contract, it not only sends the appropriate signals to the alpha motor neurons, it also instructs gamma motor neurons to contract the intrafusal fibers appropriately; this coordinated process is referred to as alpha-gamma coactivation.
The Golgi tendon organ is a specialized receptor that is located between the muscle and the tendon (Figure 1.7). Unlike the muscle spindle, which is located in parallel with extrafusal fibers, the Golgi tendon organ is located in series with the muscle and signals information about the load or force being applied to the muscle. A Golgi tendon organ is made up of a capsule containing numerous collagen fibers (Figure 1.11). The organ is innervated by primary afferents called Group Ib fibers, which have specialized endings that weave in between the collagen fibers. When force is applied to a muscle, the Golgi tendon organ is stretched, causing the collagen fibers to squeeze and distort the membranes of the primary afferent sensory endings. As a result, the afferent is depolarized, and it fires action potentials to signal the amount of force.


Figure 1,2 illustrates the difference in information conveyed by muscle spindles and Golgi tendon organs. At the resting position, the Ia afferents of spindles in the triceps muscle fire at a steady rate to encode the present length of the muscle, and the Ib afferents of the Golgi tendon organs of the biceps muscle fire at a low rate. When a light object (a balloon) is placed in the hand, there is little change in the firing rate of either afferent. When the hand starts to rise, however, the triceps muscle is stretched, and the Ia afferent fibers increase their firing rate as a function of muscle length. The Ib fibers do not change appreciably, because the balloon does not add much load to the muscle. What if a heavy object (a bowling ball) were placed in the hand instead? Because a heavy load is now placed on the biceps, the Ib afferents fire vigorously. Note that the Ia afferent is not affected, as the muscle length has not changed. When the arm begins to rise, however, the Ia afferents fire, just as with the balloon.
As noted in the previous chapter, a sense of body position is necessary for adaptive motor control. In order to move a limb toward a particular location, it is imperative to know the initial starting position of the limb, as well as any force applied to the limb. Muscle spindles and Golgi tendon organs provide this type of information. In addition, these receptors are components of certain spinal reflexes that are important for both clinical diagnosis as well as for a basic understanding of the principles of motor control.
The myotatic reflex is illustrated in Figure 2.1. A waiter is holding an empty tray, when unexpectedly a pitcher of water is placed on the tray. Because the waiter’s muscles were not prepared to support the increased weight, the tray should fall. However, a spinal reflex is automatically initiated to keep the tray relatively stable. When the heavy pitcher is placed on the tray, the increased weight stretches the biceps muscle, which results in the activation of the muscle spindle’s Ia afferents. The Ia afferents have their cell bodies in the dorsal root ganglia of the spinal cord, send projections into the spinal cord, and make synapses directly on alpha motor neurons that innervate the same (homonymous) muscle. Thus, activation of the Ia afferent causes a monosynaptic activation of the alpha motor neuron that causes the muscle to contract. As a result, the stretch of the muscle is quickly counteracted, and the waiter is able to maintain the tray at the same position.

A major role of the myotatic reflex is the maintenance of posture. If one is standing upright and starts to sway to the left, muscles in the legs and torso are stretched, activating the myotatic reflex to counteract the sway. In this way, the higher levels of the motor system are able to send a simple command (“maintain current posture”) and then be uninvolved in its implementation. The lower levels of the hierarchy implement the command with such mechanisms as the myotatic reflex, freeing the higher levels to perform other tasks such as planning the next sequence of movements.

The myotatic reflex is an important clinical reflex. It is the same circuit that produces the knee-jerk, or stretch, reflex. When the physician taps the patellar tendon with a hammer, this action causes the knee extensor muscle to stretch abruptly. This stretch activates the myotatic reflex, causing an extension of the lower leg. (Because the physician taps the tendon, this reflex is also referred to as the deep tendon reflex. Do not be confused, however, between this terminology and the Golgi tendon organ. The myotatic reflex is initiated by the muscle spindle, not the Golgi tendon organ.) As discussed below, spinal reflexes can be modulated by higher levels of the hierarchy, and thus a hyperactive or hypoactive stretch reflex is an important clinical sign to localize neurological damage.
Joints are controlled by two opposing sets of muscles, extensors and flexors, which must work in synchrony. Thus, when a muscle spindle is stretched and the stretch reflex is activated, the opposing muscle group must be inhibited to prevent it from working against the resulting contraction of the homonymous muscle (Figure 2.2). This inhibition is accomplished by an inhibitory interneuron in the spinal cord. The Ia afferent of the muscle spindle bifurcates in the spinal cord (See Chapter 6 of Section I for review). One branch innervates the alpha motor neuron that causes the homonymous muscle to contract, producing the behavioral reflex. The other branch innervates the Ia inhibitory interneuron, which in turn innervates the alpha motor neuron that synapses onto the opposing muscle. Because the interneuron is inhibitory, it prevents the opposing alpha motor neuron from firing, thereby reducing the contraction of the opposing muscle. Without this reciprocal inhibition, both groups of muscles might contract simultaneously and work against each other.
The Golgi tendon organ is involved in a spinal reflex known as the autogenic inhibition reflex (Figure 2.3). When tension is applied to a muscle, the Group Ib fibers that innervate the Golgi tendon organ are activated. These afferents have their cell bodies in the dorsal root ganglia, and they project into the spinal cord and synapse onto an interneuron called the Ib inhibitory interneuron. This interneuron makes an inhibitory synapse onto the alpha motor neuron that innervates the same muscle that caused the Ib afferent to fire.
As a result of this reflex, activation of the Ib afferent causes the muscle to cease contraction, as the alpha motor neuron becomes inhibited. Because this reflex contains an interneuron between the sensory afferent and the motor neuron, it is an example of a disynaptic reflex.

For many years, it was thought that the function of the autogenic inhibition circuit was to protect the muscle from excessive amounts of force that might damage it. A classic example is that of the weightlifter straining to raise a heavy load, when suddenly the autogenic inhibition reflex is activated and the muscle loses power, causing the weight to fall to the ground. This function was ascribed to the reflex because early work suggested that the Golgi tendon organ was only activated when large amounts of force were applied to it. More recent evidence indicates, however, that the Golgi tendon organ is sensitive to much lower levels of force than previously believed. Thus, the autogenic inhibition reflex may be more extensively involved in motor control under normal conditions. One possibility is that this reflex helps to spread the amount of work evenly across the entire muscle, so that all motor units are working efficiently. That is, if some muscle fibers are bearing more of the load than others, their Golgi tendon organs will be more active, which will tend to inhibit the contraction of those fibers. As a result, other muscle fibers that are less active will have to contract more to pick up the slack, thereby sharing the work load more efficiently.
Just as in the stretch reflex, the autogenic inhibition reflex must coordinate the activity of the extensor and flexor muscle groups (Figure 2.4). The Ib afferent fiber bifurcates in the spinal cord. One branch innervates the Ib inhibitory interneuron. The other branch innervates an excitatory interneuron that, in turn, innervates the alpha motor neuron that controls the antagonist muscle. Thus, when the homonymous muscle is inhibited from contracting, the antagonist muscle is caused to contract, allowing the opposing muscle groups to work in synchrony.
Spinal reflexes can be initiated by nonproprioceptive receptors as well as by proprioceptors. An important reflex initiated by cutaneous receptors and pain receptors is the flexor reflex. We have all experienced this reflex after accidentally touching a hot stove or a sharp object, as we withdraw our hand even before we consciously experience the sensation of pain. This quick reflex removes the limb from the damaging stimulus more quickly than if the pain signal had to travel up to the brain, be brought to conscious awareness, and then trigger a decision to withdraw the limb. The reflex circuit is illustrated in Figure 2.5. A sharp object touching the foot causes the activation of Group III afferents of pain receptors. These afferents enter the spinal cord and then travel up the cord. A branch of the afferent innervates an excitatory interneuron in the lumbar region of the spinal cord, which then excites an alpha motor neuron that causes contraction of the thigh flexor muscle. The Group III afferent also continues upward to the L2 vertebra, where another branch innervates an excitatory interneuron at this level. This interneuron excites the alpha motor neurons that excite the hip flexor muscle, allowing the coordinated activity of two muscle groups to withdraw the whole leg away from the painful stimulus. Thus, spinal reflexes work not only at a single joint; they can also coordinate the activity of multiple joints simultaneously.
When the knee joints and the hip joints are flexed, the antagonist extensor muscles must be inhibited (just as in the stretch reflex). Thus, the Group III afferents innervate inhibitory interneurons that in turn innervate the alpha motor neurons controlling the antagonist muscle.
Further circuitry is needed to make the flexor reflex adaptive. Because the weight of the body is supported by both legs, the flexor reflex must coordinate the activity not only of the leg being withdrawn but also of the opposite leg (Figure 2.6). Imagine stepping on a tack, and having the flexor reflex withdraw your right leg immediately. The left leg must simultaneously extend in order to support the body weight that would have been supported by the right leg. Without this coordination of the two legs, the shift in body mass would cause a loss of balance. Thus, the flexor reflex incorporates a crossed extension reflex. A branch of the Group III afferent innervates an excitatory interneuron that sends its axon across the midline into the contralateral spinal cord. There it excites the alpha motor neurons that innervate the extensor muscles of the opposite leg, allowing balance and body posture to be maintained.
Axons of alpha motor neurons bifurcate in the spinal cord and innervate a special inhibitory interneuron called the Renshaw cell (Figure 2.7). This interneuron innervates and inhibits the very same motor neuron that caused it to fire. Thus, a motor neuron regulates its own activity by inhibiting itself when it fires. This negative feedback loop is thought to stabilize the firing rate of motor neurons.
The reflex circuits demonstrate that sophisticated neural processing occurs at the lowest level of the motor hierarchy. These automatic reflexes can be modulated, however, by higher levels of the hierarchy. For example, when touching an iron to see if it is hot, your flexor reflex may be hypersensitive. As a result, you pull your hand away repeatedly before even touching the iron, anticipating that it may be hot. Conversely, if you remove a hot dish from the oven and the heat starts to go through the oven mitt, you will suppress the flexor response so that you do not drop your dinner as you rush to put it down on a table. These modulations (both facilitatory and inhibitory) of the spinal reflexes arise from the descending pathways from the brainstem and cortex. Voluntary movement and some sensory-driven reflex actions are also controlled by the descending pathways. The corticospinal system controls motor neurons and interneurons in the spinal cord. The corticobulbar system controls brainstem nuclei that innervate cranial muscles.
Although the motor system is organized hierarchically, the hierarchy is not a simple chain of processing from higher to lower areas. Many pathways enable the different levels of the hierarchy to influence each other. Thus, the flow of information through the motor system has both a serial organization (communication between levels) and a parallel organization (multiple pathways between each level). This parallel organization is critically important in understanding the various dysfunctions that can result from damage to the motor system. If the motor hierarchy had a strictly serial organization, like a series of links on a chain, then damage to any part of the system would produce severe deficits or paralysis in almost all types of movements. However, because of the parallel nature of processing, paralysis is actually a relatively rare outcome, produced by damage to the lowest level of the hierarchy. Damage to higher levels results in deficits in motor planning, initiation, coordination, and so forth, but movement is still possible. The parallel nature of organization is also important for the ability of undamaged parts of the motor system to compensate (at least partially) for injuries to other parts of the system.

Descending motor pathways arise from multiple regions of the brain and send axons down the spinal cord that innervate alpha motor neurons, gamma motor neurons, and interneurons. The motor neurons are topographically organized in the anterior horn of the spinal cord according to two rules: the flexor-extensor rule and the proximal-distal rule (Figure 2.8).
Corticospinal tracts. The corticospinal tract originates in the motor cortex (Figure 2.9). The axons of motor projection neurons collect in the internal capsule, and then course through the crus cerebri (cerebral peduncle) in the midbrain. At the level of the medulla, these axons form the medullary pyramids on the ventral surface of the brainstem (hence, this tract is also called the pyramidal tract). At the level of the caudal medulla, the corticospinal tract splits into two tracts. Approximately 90% of the axons cross over to the contralateral side at the pyramidal decussation, forming the lateral corticospinal tract. These axons continue to course through the lateral funiculus of the spinal cord, before synapsing either directly onto alpha motor neurons or onto interneurons in the ventral horn. The remaining 10% of the axons that do not cross at the caudal medulla constitute the anterior corticospinal tract, as they continue down the spinal cord in the anterior funiculus. When they reach the spinal segment at which they terminate, they cross over to the contralateral side through the anterior white commissure and innervate alpha motor neurons or interneurons in the anterior horn. Thus, both the lateral and anterior corticospinal tracts are crossed pathways; they cross the midline at different locations, however.

Function. The corticospinal tract (along with the corticobulbar tract) is the primary pathway that carries the motor commands that underlie voluntary movement. The lateral corticospinal tract is responsible for the control of the distal musculature and the anterior corticospinal tract is responsible for the control of the proximal musculature. A particularly important function of the lateral corticospinal tract is the fine control of the digits of the hand. The corticospinal tract is the only descending pathway in which some axons make synaptic contacts directly onto alpha motor neurons. This direct cortical innervation presumably is necessary to allow the powerful processing networks of the cortex to control the activity of the spinal circuits that direct the exquisite movements of the fingers and hands. The percentage of axons in the corticospinal tract that innervate alpha motor neurons directly is greater in humans and nonhuman primates than in other mammals, presumably reflecting the increased manual dexterity of primates. Damage to the corticospinal tract results in a permanent loss of the fine control of the extremities. Although parallel descending pathways can often recover the function of more coarse movements, these pathways are not capable of generating fine, skilled movements. In addition to the fine control of distal muscles, the corticospinal tract also plays a role in the voluntary control of axial muscles.
Rubrospinal tract. The rubrospinal tract originates in the red nucleus of the midbrain (Figure 2.10). The axons immediately cross to the contralateral side of the brain, and they course through the brainstem and the lateral funiculus of the spinal cord. The axons innervate spinal neurons at all levels of the spinal cord.

Function. The rubrospinal tract is an alternative by which voluntary motor commands can be sent to the spinal cord. Although it is a major pathway in many animals, it is relatively minor in humans. Activation of this tract causes excitation of flexor muscles and inhibition of extensor muscles. The rubrospinal tract is thought to play a role in movement velocity, as rubrospinal lesions cause a temporary slowness in movement. In addition, because the red nucleus receives most of its input from the cerebellum, the rubrospinal tract probably plays a role in transmitting learned motor commands from the cerebellum to the musculature. The red nucleus also receives some input from the motor cortex, and it is therefore probably an important pathway for the recovery of some voluntary motor function after damage to the corticospinal tract.

Vestibulospinal tracts. The two vestibulospinal tracts originate in 2 of the 4 vestibular nuclei (Figure 2.11). The lateral vestibulospinal tract originates in the lateral vestibular nucleus. It courses through the brainstem and through the anterior funiculus of the spinal cord on the ipsilateral side, before exiting ipsilaterally at all levels of the spinal cord. The medial vestibulospinal tract originates in the medial vestibular nucleus, splits immediately and courses bilaterally through the brainstem via the medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF) and through the anterior funiculus of the spinal cord, before exiting at or above the T6 vertebra.

Function. The vestibulospinal tracts mediate postural adjustments and head movements. They also help the body to maintain balance. Small movements of the body are detected by the vestibular sensory neurons, and motor commands to counteract these movements are sent through the vestibulospinal tracts to appropriate muscle groups throughout the body. The lateral vestibulospinal tract excites antigravity muscles in order to exert control over postural changes necessary to compensate for tilts and movements of the body. The medial vestibulospinal tract innervates neck muscles in order to stabilize head position as one moves around the world. It is also important for the coordination of head and eye movements.
Reticulospinal tracts. The two reticulospinal tracts originate in the brainstem reticular formation, a large, diffusely organized collection of neurons in the pons and medulla (Figure 2.12).

The pontine reticulospinal tract originates in the pontine reticular formation, courses ipsilaterally through the medial longitudinal fasciculus and through the anterior funiculus of the spinal cord, and exits ipsilaterally at all spinal levels. The medullary reticulospinal tract originates in the medullary reticular formation, courses mainly ipsilaterally (although some fibers cross the midline) through the anterior funiculus of the spinal cord, and exits at all spinal levels.

Function. The reticulospinal tracts are a major alternative to the corticospinal tract, by which cortical neurons can control motor function by their inputs onto reticular neurons. These tracts regulate the sensitivity of flexor responses to ensure that only noxious stimuli elicit the responses. Damage to the reticulospinal tract can thus cause harmless stimuli, such as gentle touches, to elicit a flexor reflex. The reticular formation also contains circuitry for many complex actions, such as orienting, stretching, and maintaining a complex posture. Commands that initiate locomotor circuits in the spinal cord are also thought to be transmitted through the medullary reticulospinal tract. Thus, the reticulospinal tracts are involved in many aspects of motor control, including the integration of sensory input to guide motor output.
Tectospinal tract. The tectospinal tract (Figure 2.13) originates in the deep layers of the superior colliculus and crosses the midline immediately. It then courses through the pons and medulla, just anterior to the medial longitudinal fasciculus. It courses through the anterior funiculus of the spinal cord, where the majority of the fibers terminate in the upper cervical levels.

Function. Little is known about the function of the tectospinal tract, but because of the nature of the visual response properties of neurons in the superior colliculus (the optic tectum), it is presumably involved in the reflexive turning of the head to orient to visual stimuli.
Voluntary movement. The most distinctive function of the descending motor pathways is the control of voluntary movement. These movements are initiated in the cerebral cortex, and the motor commands are transmitted to the musculature through a variety of descending pathways, including the corticospinal tract, the rubrospinal tract, and reticulospinal tracts. How voluntary movements are initiated and coordinated by the motor cortex is the subject of the next chapter.

Reflex modulation. Another critical function of the descending motor pathways is to modulate the reflex circuits in the spinal cord. The adaptiveness of spinal reflexes can change depending on the behavioral context; sometimes the gain (strength) or even the sign (extension vs. flexion) of a reflex must be changed in order to make the resulting movement adaptive. The descending pathways are responsible for controlling these variables. For example, consider the flexor reflex under two conditions.

Imagine a situation in which you want to pick up a dish from the stove top, but you are uncertain whether it is hot or cold. You may attempt to lightly touch the surface, and this will often lower the threshold of the flexor reflex, making you more likely to pull your hand away even if the dish is not particularly hot. (You may even withdraw your hand numerous times before even touching the dish!) Descending pathways have lowered the threshold for producing the reflex in this case, making it easier for a weaker nociceptive input to trigger the reflex; these pathways can also change the gain of the reflex, making the withdrawal response greater than usual.
Imagine now picking up the dish in order to move it to the table. As you hold the dish, more of its heat begins to transfer to your hand, and it starts to get quite hot. Rather than dropping the dish and spilling your dinner all over the floor, you rush to the table to put it down, before withdrawing your hand and wishing you had used an oven mitt. In this case, the descending pathways inhibited the flexor response.
Gamma bias. Recall from the previous chapter that there are two types of spinal motor neurons. Alpha motor neurons innervate extrafusal muscle fibers, which provide the force for a muscle contraction. Gamma motor neurons innervate the ends of intrafusal fibers and help to maintain the tautness of muscle spindles, such that they are sensitive to changes of muscle length over a wide range. In order to work adaptively, the activity of alpha and gamma motor neurons must be coordinated. Thus, whenever motor commands are sent by descending pathways to alpha motor neurons, the appropriate compensating commands are sent to gamma motor neurons. This coordination of alpha-gamma motor commands is called alpha-gamma coactivation, and the adjustment of spindle sensitivity by gamma activation is called gamma bias. Consider the following two examples:

When a command is given to a muscle to contract, the muscle spindles become slack, thereby making them insensitive to further changes in muscle length. To compensate for this, the gamma motor neurons that innervate these intrafusal muscle fibers are activated in concert with the alpha motor neurons, allowing the intrafusal fibers to contract with the muscle. This preserves the sensitivity of the muscle to unexpected stretches of the muscle (see Figure 1.10 of the chapter on Motor Unit and Muscle Receptors).
When a muscle contracts, the antagonist muscle is stretched during the movement. An obvious problem arises when one considers the stretch reflex of the antagonist muscle. If contraction of a muscle causes the activation of the stretch reflex of the antagonist muscle, the antagonist muscle will contract to resist the movement of the limb. How is it possible to ever flex a joint when the stretch reflex of the extensor muscle causes it to extend the joint instead? Alpha-gamma coactivation solves this problem by relaxing the contraction of the intrafusal fibers of the antagonist muscle, allowing the muscle to be stretched without triggering the stretch reflex during a voluntary movement.
The previous chapters discussed the lower levels of the motor hierarchy (the spinal cord and brainstem), which are involved in the low-level, “nuts and bolts” processing that controls the activity of individual muscles. Individual alpha motor neurons control the force exerted by a particular muscle, and spinal circuits can control sophisticated and complex behaviors such as walking and reflex actions. The types of movements controlled by these circuits are not initiated consciously, however. Voluntary movements require the participation of the third and fourth levels of the hierarchy: the motor cortex and the association cortex. These areas of the cerebral cortex plan voluntary actions, coordinate sequences of movements, make decisions about proper behavioral strategies and choices, evaluate the appropriateness of a particular action given the current behavioral or environmental context, and relay commands to the appropriate sets of lower motor neurons to execute the desired actions.
The motor cortex comprises three different areas of the frontal lobe, immediately anterior to the central sulcus. These areas are the primary motor cortex (Brodmann’s area 4), the premotor cortex, and the supplementary motor area (Figure 3.1). Electrical stimulation of these areas elicits movements of particular body parts. The primary motor cortex, or M1, is located on the precentral gyrus and on the anterior paracentral lobule on the medial surface of the brain. Of the three motor cortex areas, stimulation of the primary motor cortex requires the least amount of electrical current to elicit a movement. Low levels of brief stimulation typically elicit simple movements of individual body parts. Stimulation of premotor cortex or the supplementary motor area requires higher levels of current to elicit movements, and often results in more complex movements than stimulation of primary motor cortex. Stimulation for longer time periods (500 msec) in monkeys results in the movement of a particular body part to a stereotyped posture or position, regardless of the initial starting point of the body part (Figure 3.2). Thus, the premotor cortex and supplementary motor areas appear to be higher level areas that encode complex patterns of motor output and that select appropriate motor plans to achieve desired end results.
Like the somatosensory cortex of the postcentral gyrus, the primary motor cortex is somatotopically organized (Figure 3.3). Stimulation of the anterior paracentral lobule elicits movements of the contralateral leg. As the stimulating electrode is moved across the precentral gyrus from dorsomedial to ventrolateral, movements are elicited progressively from the torso, arm, hand, and face (most laterally). The representations of body parts that perform precise, delicate movements, such as the hands and face, are disproportionately large compared to the representations of body parts that perform only coarse, unrefined movements, such as the trunk or legs. The premotor cortex and supplementary motor area also contain somatotopic maps.
One might predict that the motor cortex “homunculus” arises because neurons that control individual muscles are clustered together in the cortex. That is, all of the neurons that control the biceps muscle may be located together, and all of the neurons that control the triceps may be clustered nearby, and the neurons that control the soleus muscle may be clustered in a region further removed. Electrophysiological recordings have shown that this is not the case, however. Movements of individual muscles are correlated with activity from widespread parts of the primary motor cortex. Similarly, stimulation of small regions of primary motor cortex elicits movements that require the activity of numerous muscles. Thus, the primary motor cortex homunculus does not represent the activity of individual muscles. Rather, it apparently represents the movements of individual body parts, which often require the coordinated activity of large groups of muscles throughout the body.
The cortex can also influence the processing of the side loops of the motor hierarchy. The corticostriate tract innervates the caudate nucleus and putamen of the basal ganglia. The corticopontine tract and cortico-olivary tract innervate important inputs to the cerebellum. Finally, cortical areas can influence other cortical areas, directly via corticocortical pathways and indirectly via the corticothalamic pathways (Figure 3.5). Most of these pathways are bi-directional. Thus, motor cortex receives input from other cortical areas, directly and indirectly through the thalamus, and it receives input from the cerebellum and basal ganglia, always through the thalamus.
Like all parts of the neocortex, the primary motor cortex is made of six layers (Figure 3.6). Unlike primary sensory areas, primary motor cortex is agranular cortex; that is, it does not have a cell-packed granular layer (layer 4). Instead, the most distinctive layer of primary motor cortex is its descending output layer (Layer 5), which contains the giant Betz cells. These pyramidal cells and other projection neurons of the primary motor cortex make up ~30% of the fibers in the corticospinal tract. The rest of the fibers come from the premotor cortex and the supplementary motor area (~30%), the somatosensory cortex (~30%), and the posterior parietal cortex (~10%).
As discussed above, the primary motor cortex does not generally control individual muscles directly, but rather appears to control individual movements or sequences of movements that require the activity of multiple muscle groups. Alpha motor neurons in the spinal cord, in turn, encode the force of contraction of groups of muscle fibers using the rate code and the size principle. Thus, in accordance with the concept of hierarchical organization of the motor system, the information represented by motor cortex is a higher level of abstraction than the information represented by spinal motor neurons.

What is encoded by the neurons in primary motor cortex? Clues have come from recording the activity of these neurons as experimental animals perform different motor tasks. In general, primary motor cortex encodes the parameters that define individual movements or simple movement sequences.

Primary motor cortex neurons fire 5-100 msec before the onset of a movement. Thus, rather than firing as the result of muscle activity, these neurons are involved in relaying motor commands to the alpha motor neurons that eventually cause the appropriate muscles to contract.
Primary motor cortex encodes the force of a movement. The amount of force required to raise the arm from one location to another is much greater if one is holding a bowling ball than if one is holding a balloon. Many neurons in primary motor cortex encode the amount of force that is necessary to make such a movement (Figure 3.7). Note the distinction between movement force and muscle force. Whereas a minority of primary motor cortex neurons encodes individual muscle force, a larger number encodes the amount of force necessary for a particular movement, regardless of which individual muscles are used. Alpha motor neurons, in turn, translate the commands of the motor cortex neurons and control the amount of force generated by individual muscles to accomplish that movement, under the principles of the rate code and the size principle.
Primary motor cortex encodes the direction of movement. Many neurons in the primary motor cortex are selective for a particular direction of movement. For example, one cell may fire strongly when the hand is moved to the left, whereas it will be inhibited when the hand is moved to the right (Figure 3.8).
Primary motor cortex encodes the extent of movement. The firing of some neurons is correlated with the distance of a movement. A monkey was trained to move its arm to different target locations that varied in direction and distance from the center. The firing of many neurons was correlated with the direction of movement (as in Point 3), whereas the firing of other neurons was correlated with the distance of the movement. Interestingly, some neurons were correlated with the interaction of a particular distance and direction; that is, they were correlated with a particular target position.
Primary motor cortex neurons encode the speed of movement. Almost all targeted movements follow a typical bell-shaped curve of velocity as a function of distance (Figure 3.9). For example, when the hand moves an object such as a coffee cup from one location to another (the target), the hand accelerates during the first half of the movement, reaches a peak velocity approximately halfway to the target, and then decelerates until it reaches the target. The firing rate of some primary motor cortex neurons in monkeys correlates with this bell-shaped speed profile, demonstrating that information about movement speed is contained in the spike trains of these neurons.
The premotor cortex sends axons to the primary motor cortex as well as to the spinal cord directly. It performs more complex, task-related processing than primary motor cortex. Stimulation of premotor areas in the monkey at a high level of current produces more complex postures than stimulation of the primary motor cortex. The premotor cortex appears to be involved in the selection of appropriate motor plans for voluntary movements, whereas the primary motor cortex is involved in the execution of these voluntary movements.

Premotor cortex neurons signal the preparation for movement. Monkeys were trained to make a particular movement in response to a visual signal, with a variable delay between the onset of the signal and the onset of the movement (Figure 3.10). Recordings from premotor cortex have shown that many neurons fire selectively in the delay interval, for many seconds before the onset of the movement. A particular neuron will fire when the monkey is preparing to make a movement to the left, for example, but will be silent when the monkey is preparing to make a movement to the right. Thus, the firing of this type of neuron does not cause the movement itself, but appears to be involved in preparing the monkey to make the correct movement when the “Go” signal is given. This type of neuron is called a motor-set neuron, as it fires when the monkey is preparing, or getting set, to make a movement.
Premotor cortex neurons signal various sensory aspects associated with particular motor acts. Some premotor neurons fire when the animal is performing a particular action, such as breaking a peanut (Figure 3.11). Interestingly, the same neuron fires selectively when the animal sees another monkey or person breaking the peanut. It also fires selectively to the sound of a peanut shell being broke, even without any visual or motor activity. These neurons are called “mirror” neurons, because they respond not only to a particular action of the monkey but also to the sight (or sound) of another individual performing the same action. (For an interesting PBS video on mirror neurons, go to http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/nova/sciencenow/3204/01.html.)
Premotor cortex is sensitive to the behavioral context of a particular movement. The premotor cortex of human subjects was imaged with functional MRI as they observed video of a hand grasping a cup (Figure 3.12). In one condition, the cup was full and surrounded by full plates of food; the implication was that the person was grasping the cup to take a drink. In the other condition, the cup was empty and surrounded by dirty dishes; the implication was that the person was grasping the cup to clear the table. In this experiment, the premotor cortex was more active when subjects viewed the former video than the latter, even though the movements were the same. Thus, premotor cortex neurons are sensitive to the inferred intentions of a movement, not just the movement itself, as deduce from the behavioral context in which the movement occurred.
Premotor cortex signals correct and incorrect actions. Human subjects were studied in an fMRI experiment as they observed video clips of various correct and incorrect motor acts. A correct action was one in which the movement and the associated object was performed correctly, such as setting the time on a clock. An object error was one in which the action was correct, but the object was incorrect, such as polishing a brown shoe with black shoe polish. A movement error was one in which the object was correct, but the movement was incorrect, such as attempting to put a coin into a piggy bank when the coin was oriented perpendicular to the coin slot. In this experiment, the premotor cortex was activated bilaterally during the correct actions trials and the movement error trials; for the object error trials, only the premotor cortex of the left hemisphere was activated preferentially.
The supplementary motor area (SMA) is involved in programming complex sequences of movements and coordinating bilateral movements. Whereas the premotor cortex appears to be involved in selecting motor programs based on visual stimuli or on abstract associations, the supplementary motor area appears to be involved in selecting movements based on remembered sequences of movements.

SMA responds to sequences of movements and to mental rehearsal of sequences of movements (Figure 3.13). Brain activity was measured in a PET scanner while subjects made simple and complex sequences of movement. When the movements were simple, such as a repetitive movement of a single digit, the primary motor cortex and the primary somatosensory cortex were activated on the contralateral hemisphere. When the subject was asked to perform a complex sequence of finger movements, the SMA was activated bilaterally, in addition to the contralateral primary motor and somatosensory cortex activation. Finally, when the subject was asked to remain still but to mentally rehearse the complex sequence of activity, the SMA was still active, even though the primary motor and somatosensory cortex areas were silent. Thus, the SMA appears to be involved in bilateral movements and in the mental rehearsal of these movements.
SMA is involved in the transformation of kinematic to dynamic information. Movements can be defined in terms of dynamics (the amount of force necessary to make a movement) and kinematics (the distance and angles that define a particular movement in space). Many movement plans are represented in kinematic terms (e.g., Move the hand to the left). However, the motor system must eventually translate this to a representation based on dynamics, in order to instruct the appropriate muscles to contract with the appropriate force. Recordings from monkeys have shown that during the preparatory delay before a monkey makes an instructed movement, some SMA neurons change their firing correlates from a kinematic-based representation to a dynamics-based representation, suggesting that SMA plays a vital role in this transformation.
The fourth level of the motor hierarchy is the association cortex, in particular the prefrontal cortex and the posterior parietal cortex (Figure 3.14). These brain areas are not motor areas in the strict sense. Their activity does not correlate precisely with individual motor acts, and stimulation of these areas does not result in motor output. However, these areas are necessary to ensure that movements are adaptive to the needs of the organism and appropriate to the behavioral context.
Posterior parietal cortex is involved in ensuring that movements are targeted accurately to objects in external space. This area is involved in processing spatial relationships of objects in the world and in constructing a representation of external space that is independent of the observer’s eye position or body position. Such representations allow a stable percept of the world that is independent of viewer orientation, as well as the representation of desired trajectories in space that are independent of body position. Damage to the posterior parietal cortex can result in a number of apraxias, that is, the inability to make complex, coordinated movements. For example, a patient with constructional apraxia is unable to replicate the configuration of a set of blocks in the proper sequence, even though the patient is able to maneuver each block individually with dexterity.
Prefrontal cortex is involved in the selection of appropriate actions for a particular behavioral context. It is also involved in the evaluation of the consequences of a particular course of action. Patients with damage to the prefrontal cortex have problems in executive processing. They make inappropriate behavioral decisions, and often cannot anticipate the likely consequences of their actions. They display impulsive behavior, often showing an inability to delay instant gratification for a long-term larger reward.
The previous three chapters have described the anatomy and function of the four levels of the motor system hierarchy: the spinal cord, the brainstem, the motor cortex, and the association cortex. Two other brain structures can be considered as “side loops” in the motor hierarchy. They influence the processing of motor control and modulate the output of the descending pathways without directly causing motor output. Both of these structures—the basal ganglia and the cerebellum—are now known to have other functions in addition to modulating motor control. Because the most obvious clinical signs of damage to these areas are a wide variety of motor impairments, they are still generally considered to be motor structures. Basal ganglia dysfunction causes a set of symptoms that are quite different from damage to descending motor pathways, and thus the basal ganglia were at one time considered to form an “extrapyramidal motor system” that was distinct from the pyramidal tract pathways. It is now known that the basal ganglia do not originate a separate motor pathway. Instead, they influence and modulate the activity of motor cortex and the descending motor pathways in ways that cause distinct symptoms when different basal ganglia structures are damaged.
The basal ganglia comprise a distributed set of brain structures in the telencephalon, diencephalon, and mesencephalon (Figure 4.1 and Table 1). The forebrain structures include the caudate nucleus, the putamen, the nucleus accumbens (or ventral striatum) and the globus pallidus. Together, these structures are named the corpus striatum. The caudate nucleus is a C-shaped structure that is closely associated with the lateral wall of the lateral ventricle. It is largest at its anterior pole (the head), and its size diminishes posteriorly as it follows the course of the lateral ventricle (the body) all the way to the temporal lobe (the tail), where it terminates at the amygdaloid nuclei. The putamen is also a large structure that is separated from the caudate nucleus by the anterior limb of the internal capsule. The putamen is connected to the caudate head by bridges of cells that cut across the internal capsule. Because of the striated appearance of these cell bridges (Figure 4.1B), the caudate and putamen are collectively referred to as the striatum or neostriatum, and the nucleus accumbens is often called the ventral striatum. Functionally, the caudate nucleus and the putamen are considered equivalent to each other; indeed, most mammals have only a single nucleus called the striatum. It is unclear whether there is any functional significance of the separation of the striatum into the caudate and putamen in primates. The putamen and the globus pallidus are collectively called the lenticular nucleus, or lentiform nucleus. The globus pallidus is divided into two segments: the internal (or medial) segment and the external (or lateral) segment.
The subthalamic nucleus is part of the diencephalon; as its name implies, it is located just below the thalamus. The substantia nigra is a midbrain structure, composed of two distinct parts: the pars compacta and the pars reticulata. The substantia nigra is located between the red nucleus and the crus cerebri (cerebral peduncle) on the ventral part of the midbrain. The pars compacta is the source of a clinically important dopaminergic pathway to the striatum; loss of neurons in this area is the cause of Parkinson’s disease (see below). An area that is functionally analogous to the substantia nigra pars compacta is the ventral tegmental area, which is located nearby and makes a dopaminergic projection to the nucleus accumbens.

Historically, the amygdaloid complex and the claustrum were considered parts of the basal ganglia. However, modern usage usually restricts the term to those structures that cause the motor impairments characteristic of the extrapyramidal syndrome (caudate nucleus, putamen, globus pallidus, subthalamic nucleus, and substantia nigra).
The striatum is the main recipient of afferents to the basal ganglia (Figure 4.2). These excitatory afferents arise from the entire cerebral cortex and from the intralaminar nuclei of the thalamus (primarily the centromedian nucleus and parafascicularis nucleus). The projections from different cortical areas are segregated, such that the frontal lobe projects predominantly to the caudate head and the putamen; the parietal and occipital lobes project to the caudate body; and the temporal lobe projects to the caudate tail. The primary motor cortex and the primary somatosensory cortex project mainly to the putamen, whereas the premotor cortex and supplementary motor areas project to the caudate head. Other cortical areas project primarily to the caudate. Thus, along the C-shaped extent of the caudate nucleus, the caudate cells receive their input from the cortical regions that are close by. The enlarged head of the caudate reflects the large projection from the frontal cortex to the caudate. In addition, the nucleus accumbens (ventral striatum) receives a large input from limbic cortex.

In the motor regions of the basal ganglia, there is a motor homunculus similar to that seen in the primary motor cortex. Thus, the projections from the medial wall of the anterior paracentral lobule (the part of M1 that contains a representation of the legs and torso) innervate regions of the striatum that are next to the recipient zones from the dorsal surface of the precentral gyrus (the part of M1 that contains a representation of the arms and hands). Similarly, the projections from the lateral surface of the precentral gyrus (the part of M1 that contains a representation of the face) innervate regions that are next to the arm and hand representation. This topography of projections is maintained in the intrinsic circuitry of the basal ganglia.
The major output structures of the basal ganglia are the globus pallidus internal segment (GPint) and the substantia nigra pars reticulata (SNr) (Figure 4.3). Both of these structures make GABAergic, inhibitory connections on their targets. The GPint projects to a number of thalamic structures by way of two fiber tracts: the ansa lenticularis and the lenticular fasciculus. The loop that processes sensorimotor information from the motor cortex and the somatosensory cortex projects to the ventral anterior (VA) and ventral lateral (VL) nuclei. The loop that processes other neocortical information projects to the dorsomedial nucleus (DM), intralaminar nuclei, and parts of the VA nucleus. The SNr projects to the superior colliculus, which is involved in eye movements, as well as to the VA/VL thalamic nuclei.
The striatopallidal pathway is a GABAergic, inhibitory connection between the striatum and both segments of the globus pallidus.
The striatonigral pathway is a GABAergic, inhibitory connection between the striatum and the SNr.
The globus pallidus external segment makes a GABAergic, inhibitory connection to the subthalamic nucleus.
The subthalamic nucleus makes glutamatergic, excitatory connections onto both segments of the globus pallidus and the SNr. This pathway is the only purely excitatory pathway among the intrinsic pathways of the basal ganglia.
The nigrostriatal pathway makes a dopaminergic synapse onto striatal neurons. As we will see below, this is a mixed pathway, with excitatory effects on some striatal neurons and inhibitory effects on others.
There are two distinct pathways that process signals through the basal ganglia: the direct pathway and the indirect pathway. These two pathways have opposite net effects on thalamic target structures. Excitation of the direct pathway has the net effect of exciting thalamic neurons (which in turn make excitatory connections onto cortical neurons). Excitation of the indirect pathway has the net effect of inhibiting thalamic neurons (rendering them unable to excite motor cortex neurons). The normal functioning of the basal ganglia apparently involves a proper balance between the activity of these two pathways. One hypothesis is that the direct pathway selectively facilitates certain motor (or cognitive) programs in the cerebral cortex that are adaptive for the present task, whereas the indirect pathway simultaneously inhibits the execution of competing motor programs. An upset of the balance between the direct and indirect pathways results in the motor dysfunctions that characterize the extrapyramidal syndrome (see below).

Direct pathway. Although the connectivity patterns of the direct and indirect pathways are relatively straightforward, the predominance of inhibitory connections in the system can make an understanding of the functional circuitry complicated and non-intuitive (Figure 4.5).
The direct pathway starts with cells in the striatum that make inhibitory connections with cells in the GPint. The GPint cells in turn make inhibitory connections on cells in the thalamus. Thus, the firing of GPint neurons inhibits the thalamus, making the thalamus less likely to excite the neocortex. When the direct pathway striatal neurons fire, however, they inhibit the activity of the GPint neurons. This inhibition releases the thalamic neurons from inhibition (i.e., it disinhibits the thalamic neurons), allowing them to fire to excite the cortex. Thus, because of the “double negative” in the pathway between the striatum and GPint and the GPint and thalamus, the net result of exciting the direct pathway striatal neurons is to excite motor cortex.

Because the two negative numbers cancel each other out.

Indirect pathway. The indirect pathway starts with a different set of cells in the striatum. These neurons make inhibitory connections to the external segment of the globus pallidus (GPext). The GPext neurons make inhibitory connections to cells in the subthalamic nucleus, which in turn make excitatory connections to cells in the GPint. (Remember that the subthalamic-GPint pathway is the only purely excitatory pathway within the intrinsic basal ganglia circuitry.) As we saw before, the GPint neurons make inhibitory connections on the thalamic neurons. To see the net effects of activation of the indirect pathway, let us work backwards from the GPint. When the GPint cells are active, they inhibit thalamic neurons, thus making cortex less active. When the subthalamic neurons are firing, they increase the firing rate of GPint neurons, thus increasing the net inhibition on cortex. Firing of the GPext neurons inhibits the subthalamic neurons, thus making the GPint neurons less active and disinhibiting the thalamus. However, when the indirect pathway striatal neurons are active, they inhibit the GPext neurons, thus disinhibiting the subthalamic neurons. With the subthalamic neurons free to fire, the GPint neurons inhibit the thalamus, thereby producing a net inhibition on the motor cortex.
Because there are 3 negative numbers in the equation, the net effect is negative.

Thus, as a result of the complex sequences of excitation, inhibition, and disinhibition, the net effect of the cortex exciting the direct pathway is to further excite the cortex (positive feedback loop), whereas the net effect of cortex exciting the indirect pathway is to inhibit the cortex (negative feedback loop). Presumably, the function of the basal ganglia is related to a proper balance between these two pathways. Motor cortex neurons have to excite the proper direct pathway neurons to further increase their own firing, and they have to excite the proper indirect pathways neurons that will inhibit other motor cortex neurons that are not adaptive for the task at hand (see below).
An important pathway in the modulation of the direct and indirect pathways is the dopaminergic, nigrostriatal projection from the substantia nigra pars compacta to the striatum (Figure 4.5). Direct pathway striatal neurons have D1 dopamine receptors, which depolarize the cell in response to dopamine. In contrast, indirect pathway striatal neurons have D2 dopamine receptors, which hyperpolarize the cell in response to dopamine. The nigrostriatal pathway thus has the dual effect of exciting the direct pathway while simultaneously inhibiting the indirect pathway. Because of this dual effect, excitation of the nigrostriatal pathway has the net effect of exciting cortex by two routes, by exciting the direct pathway (which itself has a net excitatory effect on cortex) and inhibiting the indirect pathway (thereby disinhibiting the net inhibitory effect of the indirect pathway on cortex). The loss of these dopamine neurons in Parkinson’s disease causes the poverty of movement that characterizes this disease, as the balance between direct pathway excitation of cortex and indirect pathway inhibition of cortex is tipped in favor of the indirect pathway, with a subsequent pathological global inhibition of motor cortex areas.
The function of the basal ganglia in motor control is not understood in detail. It appears that the basal ganglia is involved in the enabling of practiced motor acts and in gating the initiation of voluntary movements by modulating motor programs stored in the motor cortex and elsewhere in the motor hierarchy (Figure 4.6). Thus, voluntary movements are not initiated in the basal ganglia (they are initiated in the cortex); however, proper functioning of the basal ganglia appears to be necessary in order for the motor cortex to relay the appropriate motor commands to the lower levels of the hierarchy.
Recall that the major output from the basal ganglia is an inhibitory connection from the GPint (or SNr) to the thalamus (or superior colliculus). Studies of eye movements in monkeys have shed light on the function of the basal ganglia loop. Normally, the SNr neurons are tonically active, suppressing the output of the collicular neurons that control saccadic eye movements. When the direct pathway striatal neurons are excited by the cortical frontal eye fields, the SNr neurons are momentarily inhibited, releasing the collicular neurons from inhibition. This allows the appropriate collicular neurons to signal the target of the eye movement, allowing the monkey to change its gaze to a new location. The movement was initiated in the frontal eye fields; however, the proper activation of the eye movement required that collicular neurons be released from the inhibition of the basal ganglia.

What is the function of the tonic inhibitory output of the basal ganglia? Recall from the Motor Cortex chapter that stimulating the motor cortex of monkeys at various locations results in stereotyped sequences of movements, such as bringing the hand to the mouth or adopting a defensive posture. It appears that a number of “primitive” motor programs are stored in the cortex, and motor control may require the activation of these elemental motor programs in the precise temporal order to accomplish a sophisticated motor plan. It is important that only one motor program be active at a given time, however, such that one motor act (e.g., use hand to bring food to the mouth) is not competing with a conflicting motor act (e.g., use hand to shield face from dangerous object). It is thought that the basal ganglia is normally active in suppressing inappropriate motor programs, and that activation of the direct pathway temporarily releases one motor program from inhibition, enabling it to be executed by the organism. Thus, the basal ganglia act as a gate that enables the execution of automatic programs in the hierarchy.
Which motor programs should be released from inhibition at a given moment? The basal ganglia may have a major role in learning what motor acts result in rewards for the organism. This information is provided by the dopaminergic neurons of the SNc and ventral tegmental nucleus. Recordings from these neurons in monkeys have shown that they tend to respond when the monkey receives an unexpected reward, and they tend to be inhibited when the monkey fails to receive an expected reward (Figure 4.7). Because the net effect of activation of the nigrostriatal pathway is to excite the direct pathway and inhibit the indirect pathway, this pattern of dopaminergic firing may be involved in tuning the relative balance of direct/indirect pathway activity to enhance the firing of cortical motor programs that produce rewarding outcomes and to suppress the activity of motor programs that do not result in reward. In this way, motor habits can be constructed that tend to reward the animal.
As mentioned earlier, there are a number of cortical loops through the basal ganglia that involve prefrontal association cortex and limbic cortex. Through these loops, the basal ganglia are thought to play a role in cognitive function that is similar to their role in motor control. That is, the basal ganglia are involved in selecting and enabling various cognitive, executive, or emotional programs that are stored in these other cortical areas. Moreover, the basal ganglia appear to be involved in certain types of learning. For example, in rodents the striatum is necessary for the animal to learn certain stimulus-response tasks (e.g., make a right turn if stimulus A is present and make a left turn if stimulus B is present). Recordings from rat striatal neurons show that early in training, striatal neurons fire at many locations while a rat learns such a task on a T-shaped maze (Figure 4.8). This suggests that initially the striatum is involved throughout the execution of the task. As the animal learns the task and becomes exceedingly good at its performance, the striatal neurons change their activity patterns, firing only at the beginning of the trial and at the end. It appears that the learned programs to solve this task are now stored elsewhere; the firing of the striatal neurons at the beginning of the maze presumably reflects the enabling of the appropriate motor/cognitive plan in the cortex, and the firing at the end of the maze is presumably involved in evaluating the reward outcome of the trial.
In humans, the basal ganglia appear to be necessary for certain forms of implicit memory tasks. Like motor habit learning discussed above, many types of cognitive learning require repeated trials and are often unconscious. An example is probabilistic classification (Figure 4.9). In this type of task, people have to learn to classify objects based on the probability of belonging to a class, rather than on any explicit rule. In one experiment, subjects were shown a deck of cards with different symbols. Each symbol was associated with a certain probability of predicting rain or sunshine, and the subjects had to say on each trial whether the symbol was a predictor of rain or sunshine. Because the same symbol sometimes predicted sunshine and other times predicted rain, the subjects could not devise a simple rule, and they made many errors at first. Over time, however, they began to get better at classifying the symbols appropriately, although they still often claimed to be guessing. Patients with basal ganglia disorders were impaired at this task, suggesting that the processing of the cognitive loops of the basal ganglia are somehow involved in our ability to subconsciously learn the probabilities of predicted outcomes associated with particular stimuli.
A number of neurological disorders result from damage to the basal ganglia. Two of these disorders (Parkinson’s disease and Huntington’s disease) will be briefly discussed here to relate the concepts learned in this chapter to the symptoms of the disorders. More thorough treatment of these disorders will be given in the chapter on Disorders of the Nervous System.
Parkinson’s disease is characterized by slowness or absence of movement (bradykinesia or akinesia), rigidity, and a resting tremor (especially in the hands and fingers). Patients have difficulty initiating movements, and once initiated the movements are abnormally slow. The cause of Parkinson’s disease is the loss of the dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta (Figure 4.10). From one’s knowledge of the effects of the nigrostriatal pathway on the direct and indirect pathways, it becomes straightforward to see why the loss of this pathway results in the poverty of movement symptomatic of Parkinson’s disease. Because the nigrostriatal pathway excites the direct pathway and inhibits the indirect pathway, the loss of this input tips the balance in favor of activity in the indirect pathway. Thus, the GPint neurons are abnormally active, keeping the thalamic neurons inhibited. Without the thalamic input, the motor cortex neurons are not as excited, and therefore the motor system is less able to execute the motor plans in response to the patient’s volition.
The symptoms of Huntington’s disease are in many respects the opposite of the symptoms of Parkinson’s disease. Huntington’s disease is characterized by choreiform movements: involuntary, continuous movement of the body, especially of the extremities and face. Often these movements resemble pieces of adaptive movements, but they occur involuntarily and without behavioral significance. Huntington’s disease results from the selective loss of striatal neurons in the indirect pathway (Figure 4.10). Thus, the balance between the direct and indirect pathways becomes tipped in favor of the direct pathway. Without the normal inhibitory influence on the thalamus that is provided by the indirect pathway, thalamic neurons can fire randomly and inappropriately, causing the motor cortex to execute motor programs with no control by the patient.
The cerebellum (“little brain”) is a structure that is located at the back of the brain, underlying the occipital and temporal lobes of the cerebral cortex (Figure 5.1). Although the cerebellum accounts for approximately 10% of the brain’s volume, it contains over 50% of the total number of neurons in the brain. Historically, the cerebellum has been considered a motor structure, because cerebellar damage leads to impairments in motor control and posture and because the majority of the cerebellum’s outputs are to parts of the motor system. Motor commands are not initiated in the cerebellum; rather, the cerebellum modifies the motor commands of the descending pathways to make movements more adaptive and accurate. The cerebellum is involved in the following functions:

Maintenance of balance and posture. The cerebellum is important for making postural adjustments in order to maintain balance. Through its input from vestibular receptors and proprioceptors, it modulates commands to motor neurons to compensate for shifts in body position or changes in load upon muscles. Patients with cerebellar damage suffer from balance disorders, and they often develop stereotyped postural strategies to compensate for this problem (e.g., a wide-based stance).

Coordination of voluntary movements. Most movements are composed of a number of different muscle groups acting together in a temporally coordinated fashion. One major function of the cerebellum is to coordinate the timing and force of these different muscle groups to produce fluid limb or body movements.

Motor learning. The cerebellum is important for motor learning. The cerebellum plays a major role in adapting and fine-tuning motor programs to make accurate movements through a trial-and-error process (e.g., learning to hit a baseball).

Cognitive functions. Although the cerebellum is most understood in terms of its contributions to motor control, it is also involved in certain cognitive functions, such as language. Thus, like the basal ganglia, the cerebellum is historically considered as part of the motor system, but its functions extend beyond motor control in ways that are not yet well understood.
The cerebellum consists of two major parts (Figure 5.2A). The cerebellar deep nuclei (or cerebellar nuclei) are the sole output structures of the cerebellum. These nuclei are encased by a highly convoluted sheet of tissue called the cerebellar cortex, which contains almost all of the neurons in the cerebellum. A cross-section through the cerebellum reveals the intricate pattern of folds and fissures that characterize the cerebellar cortex (Figure 5.3). Like the cerebral cortex, cerebellar gyri are reproducible across individuals and have been identified and named. We will only be concerned with some of the larger divisions of the cerebellar cortex.
Divisions of the cerebellum. Two major fissures running mediolaterally divide the cerebellar cortex into three primary subdivisions (Figure 5.2B and Figure 5.3). The posterolateral fissure separates the flocculonodular lobe from the corpus cerebelli, and the primary fissure separates the corpus cerebelli into a posterior lobe and an anterior lobe (Figure 5.4). The cerebellum is also divided sagittally into three zones that run from medial to lateral (Fig. 5.4). The vermis (from the Latin word for worm) is located along the midsagittal plane of the cerebellum. Directly lateral to the vermis is the intermediate zone. Finally, the lateral hemispheres are located lateral to the intermediate zone (there are no clear morphological borders between the intermediate zone and the lateral hemisphere that are visible from a gross specimen).
Cerebellar nuclei. All outputs from the cerebellum originate from the cerebellar deep nuclei. Thus, a lesion to the cerebellar nuclei has the same effect as a complete lesion of the entire cerebellum. It is important to know the inputs, outputs, and anatomical relationships between the different cerebellar nuclei and the subdivisions of the cerebellum (Figure 5.5).

The fastigial nucleus is the most medially located of the cerebellar nuclei. It receives input from the vermis and from cerebellar afferents that carry vestibular, proximal somatosensory, auditory, and visual information. It projects to the vestibular nuclei and the reticular formation.
The interposed nuclei comprise the emboliform nucleus and the globose nucleus. They are situated lateral to the fastigial nucleus. They receive input from the intermediate zone and from cerebellar afferents that carry spinal, proximal somatosensory, auditory, and visual information. They project to the contralateral red nucleus (the origin of the rubrospinal tract).
The dentate nucleus is the largest of the cerebellar nuclei, located lateral to the interposed nuclei. It receives input from the lateral hemisphere and from cerebellar afferents that carry information from the cerebral cortex (via the pontine nuclei). It projects to the contralateral red nucleus and the ventrolateral (VL) thalamic nucleus.
The vestibular nuclei are located outside the cerebellum, in the medulla. Hence, they are not strictly cerebellar nuclei, but they are considered to be functionally equivalent to the cerebellar nuclei because their connectivity patterns are identical to the cerebellar nuclei. The vestibular nuclei receive input from the flocculonodular lobe and from the vestibular labyrinth. They project to various motor nuclei and originate the vestibulospinal tracts.
In addition to these inputs, all cerebellar nuclei and all regions of cerebellum get special inputs from the inferior olive of the medulla (discussed below).

It is convenient to remember that the anatomical locations of the cerebellar nuclei correspond to the cerebellar cortex regions from which they receive input. Thus, the medially located fastigial nucleus receives input from the medially located vermis; the slightly lateral interposed nuclei receive input from the slightly lateral intermediate zone; and the most lateral dentate nucleus receives input from the lateral hemispheres.

Cerebellar peduncles. Three fiber bundles carry the input and output of the cerebellum.

The inferior cerebellar peduncle (also called the restiform body) primarily contains afferent fibers from the medulla, as well as efferents to the vestibular nuclei.
The middle cerebellar peduncle (also called the brachium pontis) primarily contains afferents from the pontine nuclei.
The superior cerebellar peduncle (also called the brachium conjunctivum) primarily contains efferent fibers from the cerebellar nuclei, as well as some afferents from the spinocerebellar tract.
Thus, the inputs to the cerebellum are conveyed primarily through the inferior and middle cerebellar peduncles, whereas the outputs are conveyed primarily through the superior cerebellar peduncle. The inputs arise from the ipsilateral side of the body, and the outputs also go to the ipsilateral side of the body. Note that this is true even for the outputs to the contralateral red nucleus. Recall from the chapter on descending motor pathways that the rubrospinal tract immediately crosses the midline after the fibers leave the red nucleus. Thus, cerebellar output to the red nucleus affects the ipsilateral side of the body by a double-crossed pathway. Unlike the cerebral cortex, the cerebellum receives input from, and controls output to, the ipsilateral side of the body, and damage to the cerebellum therefore results in deficits to the ipsilateral side of the body.
The anatomical subdivisions described above correspond to three major functional subdivisions of the cerebellum.

Vestibulocerebellum. The vestibulocerebellum comprises the flocculonodular lobe and its connections with the lateral vestibular nuclei. Phylogenetically, the vestibulocerebellum is the oldest part of the cerebellum. As its name implies, it is involved in vestibular reflexes (such as the vestibuloocular reflex; see below) and in postural maintenance.

Spinocerebellum. The spinocerebellum comprises the vermis and the intermediate zones of the cerebellar cortex, as well as the fastigial and interposed nuclei. As its name implies, it receives major inputs from the spinocerebellar tract. Its output projects to rubrospinal, vestibulospinal, and reticulospinal tracts. It is involved in the integration of sensory input with motor commands to produce adaptive motor coordination.

Cerebrocerebellum. The cerebrocerebellum is the largest functional subdivision of the human cerebellum, comprising the lateral hemispheres and the dentate nuclei. Its name derives from its extensive connections with the cerebral cortex, via the pontine nuclei (afferents) and the VL thalamus (efferents). It is involved in the planning and timing of movements. In addition, the cerebrocerebellum is involved in the cognitive functions of the cerebellum.
The cerebellar cortex is divided into three layers (Figure 5.6). The innermost layer, the granule cell layer, is made of 5 x 1010 small, tightly packed granule cells. The middle layer, the Purkinje cell layer, is only 1-cell thick. The outer layer, the molecular layer, is made of the axons of granule cells and the dendrites of Purkinje cells, as well as a few other cell types. The Purkinje cell layer forms the border between the granule and molecular layers.
Granule cells. Granule cells are very small, densely packed neurons that account for the huge majority of neurons in the cerebellum. Indeed, cerebellar granule cells account for more than half of the neurons in the entire brain. These cells receive input from mossy fibers and project to the Purkinje cells.
Purkinje cells. The Purkinje cell is one of the most striking cell types in the mammalian brain. Its apical dendrites form a large fan of finely branched processes (Figure 5.7). Remarkably, this dendritic tree is almost two-dimensional; looked at from the side, the dendritic tree is flat (click PLAY on Figure 5.7). Moreover, all Purkinje cells are oriented in parallel. This arrangement has important functional considerations, as we shall see below.
Other cell types. In addition to the major cell types (granule cells and Purkinje cells), the cerebellar cortex also contains various interneuron types, including the Golgi cell, the basket cell, and the stellate cell.

Connectivity. The cerebellar cortex has a relatively simple, stereotyped connectivity pattern that is identical throughout the whole structure. Figure 6 illustrates a simplified diagram of the connectivity of the cerebellum. Cerebellar input can be divided into two distinct classes.

Mossy fibers originate in the pontine nuclei, the spinal cord, the brainstem reticular formation, and the vestibular nuclei, and they make excitatory projections onto the cerebellar nuclei and onto granule cells in the cerebellar cortex. They are called mossy fibers because of the tufted appearance of their synaptic contacts with granule cells. There is a large degree of divergence in the mossy fiber-granule cell connection, as each mossy fiber innervates hundreds of granule cells. The granule cells send axons up toward the cortical surface. Each axon bifurcates in the molecular layer, sending a collateral in opposite directions. These fibers, called parallel fibers, run parallel to the folds of the cerebellar cortex, where they make excitatory synapses with Purkinje cells along the way (Figure 5.7, rotated view after PLAY). The two-dimensional arbors of the Purkinje cell dendrites are oriented perpendicular to the parallel fibers. Thus, the arrangement of Purkinje cells and parallel fibers resembles telephone lines running between telephone poles. Each parallel fiber makes contact with hundreds of Purkinje cells; because of the high degree of divergence of the mossy fiber-granule cell synapses, the firing of each Purkinje cell can be influenced (disynaptically) by thousands of mossy fibers.
Climbing fibers originate exclusively in the inferior olive and make excitatory projections onto the cerebellar nuclei and onto the Purkinje cells of the cerebellar cortex. They are called climbing fibers because their axons climb and wrap around the dendrites of the Purkinje cell like a climbing vine. Each Purkinje cell receives a single, extremely powerful input from a single climbing fiber. In contrast to mossy fibers and parallel fibers, each climbing fiber contacts only 10 Purkinje cells on average, making ~300 synapses with each Purkinje cell. Thus, the climbing fiber is a restricted, but extremely powerful, excitatory input onto Purkinje cells.
The Purkinje cell is the sole source of output from the cerebellar cortex. It is important to note that Purkinje cells make inhibitory connections onto the cerebellar nuclei. (Note the distinction between the Purkinje cells, which constitute the sole output of the cerebellar cortex, and the cerebellar nuclei, which constitute the sole output of the entire cerebellum.) Almost all of the spikes generated by the Purkinje cell are caused by its parallel-fiber inputs. These inputs cause the Purkinje cell to fire at a high resting rate (~70 spikes/sec), tonically inhibiting its cerebellar nucleus targets. The powerful inputs from climbing fibers occur less frequently (~1 spike/sec); thus, they have a minor influence on the overall firing rate of the Purkinje cell. The Purkinje cell spikes that are generated by climbing fibers are calcium-spikes, however, which allow the climbing fibers to initiate a number of calcium-dependent changes in the Purkinje cell. As described below, one important change appears to be a long-lasting change in the strength of the parallel-fiber inputs to the Purkinje cell.
Much of what is known about cerebellar function comes from studies of patients with cerebellar damage. In general, such patients display uncoordinated voluntary movements and problems maintaining balance and posture. The following are some symptoms of cerebellar damage (we will discuss more symptoms in the next chapter):

Decomposition of movement. Most of our movements involve the coordinated activity of many muscle groups and different joints to produce a smooth trajectory of the body part through space. Patients with cerebellar dysfunction are unable to produce these coordinated, smooth movements. Instead, they often break the movements down into their component parts in order to execute the desired trajectory. For example, touching one’s finger to one’s nose requires the coordinated activity of shoulder, elbow, and wrist joints. Cerebellar patients must first perform the shoulder movement, then the elbow movement, and finally the wrist movement in sequence, rather than as one, uniform motion.
Intention tremor. When making a movement to a target, cerebellar patients often produce an involuntary tremor that increases as they approach closer to the target. For example, if reaching for a cup, the hand starts out in a direct line toward the cup; as it gets closer, however, the hand begins to move back and forth as it attempts to make contact with the cup.
Dysdiadochokinesia. Patients have difficulty performing rapidly alternating movements, such as hitting a surface rapidly and repeatedly with the palm and back of the hand.
Deficits in motor learning. Experimental studies have demonstrated that cerebellar damage causes deficits in motor learning in both human patients and experimental animals. One prominent experimental model is the vestibuloocular reflex (VOR). This reflex allows us to maintain gaze on an object when the head is rotated (Figure 5.8). Vestibular signals detect the head movement, and send signals through the cerebellum to the eye muscles to precisely counter the head rotation and maintain a stable center of gaze. The motor commands to the eyes must be calibrated precisely with experience, and this calibration appears to be the job of the cerebellum. Experiments have been performed in which subjects wore prisms that magnified the visual image. When the subjects’ heads were moved, the VOR caused the visual image to shift on the retina rather than remaining stable. Over days, however, the VOR slowly adjusted, such that the proper compensatory eye movements were made to keep the retinal image stable when the head was rotated. In experimental animals, lesions to the cerebellum prevent this adjustment of the VOR.
A second example of cerebellum-dependent motor learning involves the execution of accurate, coordinated movements. Subjects wore prism goggles that shifted the visual image to the right, and they were asked to then throw balls at a target on the wall. Because of the prisms, the accuracy of the subjects was initially quite low, as the balls consistently hit to the left of the target. With repeated practice, however, the subjects became more and more accurate at hitting the target. When the goggles were removed, the subject now began to throw the balls to the right of the target, because their motor programs had been recalibrated to use the shifted visual input. Over time, once again, they gradually increased their accuracy. Patients with cerebellar damage never learned to compensate for the prism, as their balls always landed to the left of the target when the goggles were worn. When the goggles were removed, they were immediately accurate at hitting the target, because they never made compensations for the earlier prism trials.

A third example involves the Pavlovian classical conditioning of the eye blink reflex. In this task, a neutral stimulus (such as a tone) is paired with a noxious stimulus (such as a puff of air to the eye) that causes a reflexive eye blink. Over time, experimental animals will learn to close their eye when the tone occurs, in anticipation of the air puff. This learned eyelid closure is remarkably well-timed to peak at the expected time of the puff. Animals with cerebellar damage do not learn to produce the eyelid closure in response to the tone.
What do the various symptoms of cerebellar damage have in common that reveal the function of the cerebellum? A number of different theories have been proposed. Recall the discussion in Chapter 1 of the ubiquitous use of sensory information in motor control. The cerebellum receives extensive sensory input, and it appears to use this input to guide movements in both a feedback and feedforward control manner.
In a feedback controller, a desired output is compared continuously with the actual output, and adjustments are made during the execution of the movement until the actual movement matches the desired movement. A common example of a feedback control system is the thermostat in your home (Figure 5.9).
The thermostat is set to a desired temperature (e.g., 72°), and a thermometer measures the current temperature in the room. If the thermostat (the comparator) detects that the room is cooler than the desired temperature, it sends an error signal that turns on the furnace. If the comparator detects that the room is warmer than the desired setting, its sends an error signal that turns on the air conditioner.

Feedback control systems can produce very accurate outputs; however, in general they are slow. In order to change the output, the effector must wait until information is transmitted from the sensor to the comparator and then to the effector. At this point, another comparison is made, and the process continues. Consider further the thermostat example. If the temperature reads 5° cooler than desired, the thermostat can instruct the furnace to turn on at a moderate heat. It reads the new room temperature, and, if it is still too cool, it instructs the furnace to deliver more heat, and so on. Although this will eventually produce an accurate room temperature at the desired point, it takes a number of cycles to reach that point. One possible solution for quicker results would be to turn an enormous furnace on full-blast, such that is heats the room very quickly. This solution, however, can generate another problem. It will tend to cause the system to oscillate if the feedback pathways are slow. For example, assume that the furnace can heat the room at the rate of 5° per second, but that it takes 2 seconds for the thermometer to adjust to the new temperature, and for the new error signal to turn the furnace off. In those 2 seconds, the furnace has heated the room up 10°, and now it is too warm. So the error signal turns on the air conditioner, and it cools the room at 5°/sec. Of course, it also takes 2 sec to receive the feedback, and by the time it is told to shut off, it has cooled the room by 10°. You can see what happens: the system will be sent into an endless oscillation of being 5° too hot and 5° too cold. In order for a feedback system to work well, the transmission time of sensory information through the comparator to the effector must be rapid compared to the time of the action.

Feedback control systems work well only when the sensory feedback about the actual output is fast relative to the actual output. If the actual output is faster than the sensor’s ability to provide feedback, then the system will tend to oscillate between overshooting and undershooting the desired output. Thus, a feedback controller is useful for slow movements, like postural adjustments. The role of the myotatic reflex in posture maintenance is an example of a feedback controller in the spinal cord, and the cerebellum plays a role in coordinating these postural adjustments. Feedback control is not effective for most of the fast movements we make routinely (such as an eye movement or reaching out for a cup). For these movements, a feedforward controller is needed.
In a feedforward control system, when a desired output is sent to the controller, the controller evaluates sensory information about the environment and about the system itself before the output commands are generated. It uses the sensory information to program the best set of instructions to accomplish the desired output. However, in a pure feedforward system, once the commands are sent, there is no way to alter them (i.e., there is no feedback loop). The advantage of a feedforward system is that it can produce the precise set of commands for the effector without needing to constantly check the output and make corrections during the movement itself. The main disadvantage, however, is that the feedforward controller requires a period of trial-and-error learning before it can function properly. In most biological systems, it is hard (perhaps impossible) to pre-program all of the possible sensory conditions that the controller may encounter during the life of the organism. Furthermore, the environment and conditions under which actions are made are constantly changing, and the feedforward controller must be able to adapt its output commands to account for these changes.
Let us extend the thermostat example to see how a temperature controller operating as a feedforward system would work to raise the temperature of a room from 70° to 75°. The controller would use diverse sensory information about the environment before sending its command to the furnace (Figure 5.10). For example, it would read the current temperature, the current humidity level, the size of the room, the number of people in the room, and so forth. Based on this information, it would direct the furnace to turn on for a pre-set period of time, and that’s it. There would be no need to continually compare the current temperature with the desired setting, as the system has predetermined how long the furnace needs to be working in order to achieve the desired temperature. How did the controller obtain this information? A feedforward controller requires a large amount of experience in order to learn the appropriate actions needed for each set of environmental conditions. If on one trial it turns the furnace off too soon and the room does not reach the desired temperature, it adjusts its programming such that the next time it encounters the same environmental conditions, it turns the furnace on for a longer period of time. Through many such instances of trial and error learning, the feedforward system creates a “look-up table” that tells it how long the furnace needs to be active under the current conditions. The key distinction between a feedback and feedforward system is that the feedback system uses sensory information to generate an error signal during the control of a movement, whereas a feedforward system uses sensory information in advance of a movement. Any error signal about the final output is used by the feedforward system only to change its programming of future movements.
The cerebellar involvement in the VOR may be explained in terms of the learning requirements of a feedforward controller. When the head moves, a compensatory eye movement must be made to maintain a stable gaze. The cerebellum receives sensory input from the vestibular system informing it that the head is moving. It also receives input from eye muscle proprioceptors and other relevant sources of information about current conditions in order to make an accurate compensatory eye movement. It evaluates all of this advance sensory information and calculates the proper eye movement to exactly counterbalance the head movement. What if the eye movement does not match the head movement, however, and the visual image moves across the retina (such as in the experimental condition in which a prism was worn, or in a real-life situation in which an individual wears new prescription eyeglasses)? The retinal slip constitutes an error signal to tell the cerebellum that next time these conditions are met, adjust the eye movement to decrease the retinal slip. This trial and error sequence will be repeated until the movement is properly calibrated; moreover, these mechanisms will ensure that the movements stay calibrated.

As another example, the coordination of movements requires that muscle groups be activated in precise temporal sequence. Not only do the different joints need to be coordinated temporally, but even antagonist muscles that control the same joint need precise temporal coordination. For example, an extensor muscle needs to be activated to start a reaching movement, and the corresponding flexor muscle needs to be activated at the end of the movement to stop the movement appropriately. The precise timing of muscle contractions and the force necessary for each contraction varies with the amount of load placed on a muscle, as well as on the inherent properties of the muscle itself (e.g., elasticity). These variables are constantly changing throughout life, as one grows, gains/loses weights, and ages. Moreover, a similar movement will require different patterns of motor activity depending on the weight being born by the muscle (for example, if an extended hand is empty or holding a heavy weight). The cerebellum appears necessary for the proper timing and coordination of muscle groups, very likely through a trial-and-error learning mechanism discussed previously. Such a role helps explain the deficits seen in dysdiadochokinesia, in which patients cannot perform rapidly alternating sequences of movements.

It is believed that the mossy fiber inputs to the cerebellum convey the sensory information used to evaluate the overall sensory context of the movement. Mossy fibers are known to respond to sensory stimuli; they are also correlated with different movements (Figure 5.11). These fibers convey such information as: Where are the appropriate body parts (proprioceptors), what is the current load on the muscle (proprioceptors, somatosensory receptors, etc.), what other sensory information can predict a useful response (e.g., the tone in the eye blink conditioning), what are the desired movements (motor cortex). The error signal is believed to be conveyed by the climbing fiber inputs. Climbing fibers are known to be especially active when an unexpected event occurs, such as when a greater load than expected is placed on a muscle or when a toe is stubbed. Thus, the large divergence of input from the mossy fibers to the granule cells to the parallel fibers is believed to create complex representations of the entire sensory context at present and the desired motor output. When the desired output is not achieved, the climbing fibers signal this error and trigger a calcium spike in the Purkinje cell. The influx of calcium changes the connection strengths between parallel fibers and Purkinje cells, such that the next time the same behavioral context occurs, the motor output will be modified to more closely approximate the desired output.

The previous motor system chapters have deconstructed the motor system into its component parts, in an effort to portray how the brain’s “divide and conquer” strategy assigns different motor control tasks to different brain regions. This chapter describes the types of disorders that result from damage or disease to different parts of the motor system. In the process, the different components of the motor system are reviewed to see how they work together to produce the fluid, effortless body movements that we take for granted. An emphasis is placed on trying to explain the causes and symptoms of motor system disorders in terms of the basic principles of neuroanatomy and neuronal function that you learned in the earlier chapters.

The first level of the motor system hierarchy is the spinal cord, the location of the alpha motor neurons that constitute the “final common pathway” of all motor commands. Alpha motor neurons directly innervate skeletal muscle, causing the contractions that produce all movements. Reflex circuits and other circuitry within the spinal cord underlie the automatic processing of many of the direct commands to the muscles (the “nuts and bolts” processing), thereby freeing higher-order areas to concentrate on more global, task-related processing.

Motor system dysfunction can result from damage or disease at any level of the motor system hierarchy and side-loops. Differences in the symptoms that result from damage at different levels allow the clinician to localize where in the hierarchy the damage is likely to be. Damage to alpha motor neurons results in a characteristic set of symptoms called the lower motor neuron syndrome (lower motor neurons refer to alpha motor neurons in the spinal cord and brain stem; all motor system neurons higher in the hierarchy are referred to as upper motor neurons). This damage usually arises from certain diseases that selectively affect alpha motor neurons (such as polio) or from localized lesions near the spinal cord. Lower motor neuron syndrome is characterized by the following symptoms:

The effects can be limited to small groups of muscles. Recall that a motor neuron pool is a nucleus of alpha motor neurons that innervate a single muscle (link to Motor Unit Figure 2). Furthermore, nearby motor neuron pools control nearby muscles. Thus, restricted damage to lower motor neurons, either within the spinal cord or at the ventral roots, will affect only a restricted group of muscles.
Muscle atrophy. When alpha motor neurons die, the muscle fibers that they innervate become deprived of necessary trophic factors and eventually the muscle itself atrophies.
Weakness. Because of the damage to alpha motor neurons and the atrophy of muscles, weakness is profound in lower motor neuron disorders.
Fasciculation. Damaged alpha motor neurons can produce spontaneous action potentials. These spikes cause the muscle fibers that are part of that neuron’s motor unit to fire, resulting in a visible twitch (called a fasciculation) of the affected muscle (Figure 6.1).
Fibrillation. With further degeneration of the alpha motor neuron, only remnants of the axons near the muscle fibers remain. These individual axon fibers can also generate spontaneous action potentials; however, these action potentials will only cause individual muscle fibers to contract. This spontaneous twitching of individual muscle fibers is called a fibrillation (Fig. 1). Fibrillations are too small to be seen as a visible muscle contraction. They can only be detected with electrophysiological recordings of the muscle activity (an electromyogram).
Hypotonia. Because alpha motor neurons are the only way to stimulate extrafusal muscle fibers, the loss of these neurons causes a decrease in muscle tone.
Hyporeflexia. The myotatic (stretch) reflex is weak or absent with lower motor neuron disorders, because the alpha motor neurons that cause muscle contraction are damaged.
Damage to any part of the motor system hierarchy above the level of alpha motor neurons (not including the side loops) results in a set of symptoms termed the upper motor neuron syndrome. Some of these symptoms are opposite of those of lower motor neuron disorders. Thus, one of the critical determinations a clinician must make is whether a patient presenting with motor problems has an upper motor neuron disorder or a lower motor neuron disorder.

Upper motor neuron disorders typically arise from such causes as stroke, tumors, and blunt trauma. For example, strokes to the middle cerebral artery, lateral striate artery, or the medial striate artery can cause damage to the lateral surface of cortex or to the internal capsule, where the descending axons of the corticospinal tract collect. The symptoms of upper motor neuron syndrome are:

The effects extend to large groups of muscles. Recall from the Motor Cortex chapter that muscles from different body parts are activated by stimulation of parts of motor cortex, consistent with the notion that motor cortex represents movements that are controlled by many joints, rather than individual muscles. Thus, a stroke in a particular part of motor cortex will affect the activation of many muscles in the body. Likewise, a stroke that affects the internal capsule or crus cerebri could affect muscles on the entire contralateral side of the body.
Atrophy is rare. Because alpha motor neurons are present, muscles will continue to receive trophic agents necessary for their survival. A mild amount of atrophy may result from disuse, but it will not be as pronounced as that resulting from a lower motor neuron disorder.
Weakness. Upper motor neuron disorders produce a graded weakness of movement (paresis), which differs from the complete loss of muscle activity caused by paralysis (plegia).
Absence of fasciculations. Because alpha motor neurons themselves are spared, fasciculations do not occur.
Absence of fibrillations. Likewise, fibrillations do not occur.
Hypertonia. Upper motor neuron disorders result in an increase in muscle tone. Recall that descending motor pathways can modulate the intrinsic circuitry that is present in the spinal cord. This modulatory input can be either inhibitory or excitatory. Through mechanisms that are not well understood, the loss of descending inputs tends to result in an increased firing rate of alpha and/or gamma motor neurons. The higher firing rate causes an increase in the resting level of muscle activity, resulting in hypertonia.
Hyperreflexia. Because of the loss of inhibitory modulation from descending pathways, the myotatic (stretch) reflex is exaggerated in upper motor neuron disorders. The stretch reflex is a major clinical diagnostic test of whether a motor disorder is caused by damage to upper or lower motor neurons.
Clonus. Sometimes the stretch reflex is so strong that the muscle contracts a number of times in a 5-7 Hz oscillation when the muscle is rapidly stretched and then held at a constant length. This abnormal oscillation, called clonus, can be felt by the clinician.
Initial contralateral flaccid paralysis. In the initial stages after damage to motor cortex, the contralateral side of the body shows a flaccid paralysis. Gradually, over the course of a few weeks, motor function returns to the contralateral side of the body. This gradual recovery of function results from the ability of other motor pathways to take over some of the lost functions. Recall that there are multiple descending motor pathways by which high-order information can reach the spinal cord. Thus, descending pathways such as the rubrospinal and the reticulospinal tracts, which receive direct or indirect cortical input, can take over the function lost by the damage to the corticospinal tract. Moreover, primary motor cortex itself is capable of reorganizing itself to recover some lost function. Thus, if the part of motor cortex that controls a certain body movement is damaged, neighboring parts of the motor cortex that are undamaged can, to some extent, alter their function to help compensate for the damaged areas. The one major exception to the recovery of function is that fine control of the distal musculature will not be regained after a lesion to the corticospinal tract. Recall that there are direct connections from primary motor cortex neurons to alpha motor neurons controlling the fingers. These connections presumably underlie our abilities to manipulate objects with great precision and to do such tasks as playing a piano and performing microsurgery. None of the other descending pathways have direct connections onto spinal motor neurons, and none of them can compensate for the loss of fine motor control of the hands and fingers after damage to the corticospinal tract.
Spasticity. A clinical sign of upper motor neuron disorder is a velocity dependent resistance to passive movement of the limb. If the clinician moves a patient’s limb slowly, there may be little resistance to the movement. As the passive movement becomes quicker, however, at a certain point the muscle will sharply resist the movement. This is referred to as a “spastic catch.” The mechanism for this spasticity is not entirely known, but altered firing rate of gamma motor neurons and their regulating interneurons may be involved, as well as an increase in alpha motor neuron activity, causing an inappropriately powerful stretch reflex to a fast stretch of the muscle. Sometimes, the resistance becomes so great that the autogenic inhibition reflex is initiated, causing a sudden drop in the resistance; this is referred to as the clasp-knife reflex.

Babinski sign. A classic neurological test for corticospinal tract damage is the Babinski test. In this test, the clinician strokes the sole of the foot firmly with an instrument. This elicits a normal plantar response in normal individuals, as the toes curl inward. In patients with an upper motor neuron disorder, however, an abnormal extensor plantar response is elicited, as the big toe extends upward and the remaining toes fan out. This is called a positive Babinski sign (Figure 6.2). Interestingly, the positive Babinski sign is normal in infants for the first 2 years of life. During development, however, the reflex changes to the normal adult pattern, presumably as corticospinal circuits mature.
In addition to the above symptoms, damage to the motor cortex and association cortex can result in impairments in motor planning and strategies and in an inability to perform complex motor tasks. Performance of simple tasks is intact, but patients are unable to perform complex, practiced tasks. This symptom is known as apraxia. For example, patients may be unable to arrange a set of blocks to match an example block-structure in front of them. They can move the blocks individually, but cannot come up with a motor plan to arrange them properly. This disorder is known as constructional apraxia. Other apraxias include dressing apraxia (inability to dress oneself) and verbal apraxia (inability to coordinate mouth movements to produce speech).
A section or crush of the spinal cord will result in paralysis of all parts of the body below the damaged region. Even though such an injury occurs in the spinal cord, it is not considered a lower motor neuron disorder, as the alpha motor neurons themselves are not directly damaged. If the damage occurs at the cervical level, then all four limbs will be paralyzed (quadriplegia). If the damage occurs below the cervical enlargement, then only the legs are paralyzed (paraplegia). Other terms used to describe patterns of paralysis are hemiplegia (paralysis to one side of the body) and monoplegia (paralysis of a single limb).

The basal ganglia have historically been considered part of the motor system because of the variety of motor deficits that occur when they are damaged. The types of symptoms that result from basal ganglia disorders can be divided into two classes: dyskinesias, which are abnormal, involuntary movements, and akinesias, which are abnormal, involuntary postures. Because the basal ganglia were once considered to form a separate, “extrapyramidal” motor system, these symptoms are called extrapyramidal disorders.
Resting tremors are most often associated with Parkinson’s disease. When the patient is at rest, certain body parts will display a 4-7 Hz tremor. For example, the thumb and forefingers will move back-and-forth against each other in a characteristic tremor called “pill-rolling tremor.” The tremor stops when the body part engages in active movement.
Athetosis is characterized by involuntary, writhing movements, especially of the hands and face.
Chorea, which derives from the Greek word for “dance,” is characterized by continuous, writhing movements of the entire body. It is viewed by some as an extreme form of athetosis. Chorea is most closely identified with Huntington’s disease.
Ballismus is characterized by involuntary, ballistic movements of the extremities.
Tardive dyskinesia can result from the long-term use of antipsychotic drugs that target the dopamine system. It is characterized by involuntary movements of the tongue, face, arms, lips, and other body parts. It is thought to occur as the result of an imbalance between the D1 and D2 receptors, thereby favoring the direct pathway over the indirect pathway.

Rigidity is a resistance to passive movement of the limb. Unlike spasticity, rigidity does not depend on the speed of the passive movement. In some patients, this resistance is so great that it is referred to as lead-pipe rigidity, because moving the patient’s limb feels like bending a lead pipe. In some patients, this rigidity is coupled with tremors and is called cogwheel rigidity, as moving the limb feels to the clinician like the catching and release of gears. As with spasticity, the mechanism is not entirely understood, but may result from continuous firing of alpha motor neurons causing a continual contraction of the muscle.
Dystonia is the involuntary adoption of abnormal postures, as agonist and antagonist muscles both contract and become so rigid that the patient cannot maintain normal posture.
Bradykinesia refers to a slowness, or poverty, of movement.

A number of well-known movement disorders are associated with basal ganglia dysfunction. We shall concentrate on 3 of the most well-understood: Parkinson’s disease, Huntington’s disease, and hemiballismus. To understand how these disorders result in the specific symptoms, it is necessary to review the circuit anatomy of the basal ganglia that was presented in the Basal Ganglia chapter.

Parkinson’s disease results from the death of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta. It is characterized by a resting tremor, but the most debilitating symptom is severe bradykinesia or akinesia. In advanced cases, patients have difficulty initiating movements, although involuntary, reflexive movements can be normal. It is as if the loss of the substantia nigra neurons has put a brake on the output of motor cortex, inhibiting voluntary motor commands from descending to the brain stem and spinal cord.

Although the cause of Parkinson’s disease is still not known, much has been learned in the past 15 years from the development of an animal model of Parkinson’s disease. This model was discovered by accident when a number of young patients presented with symptoms remarkably similar to Parkinson’s disease. These patients were drug addicts who had been taking an artificially manufactured drug called MPTP (1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyradine). This drug destroyed the dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra, leading to a Parkinsonian disorder. Laboratory animals injected with MPTP have since become a leading model for understanding the disease and developing treatments.

How does the loss of the dopaminergic neurons cause the poverty of movements associated with Parkinson’s disease (Figure 6.3)? Recall from the Basal Ganglia chapter that the substantia nigra pars compacta projects to both direct pathway and indirect pathways neurons in the striatum. Because there are two different types of dopamine receptors, substantia nigra activity excites the direct pathway and inhibits the indirect pathway. The net effect of the direct pathway is to excite motor cortex, and the net effect of the indirect pathway is to inhibit motor cortex. Thus, the loss of the nigrostriatal dopaminergic pathway upsets the fine balance of excitation and inhibition in the basal ganglia and reduces the excitation of motor cortex. In ways that are not understood, this reduction of thalamic excitation interferes with the ability of the motor cortex to generate commands for voluntary movement, resulting in the poverty of movement of Parkinsonian patients. It is as if all of the motor programs stored in cortex are constantly inhibited by the indirect pathway, with not enough excitation of the direct pathway for the desired motor program to become activated.

There is no cure for Parkinson’s disease, but a number of effective treatments exist. The earliest effective treatment was developed when it was first discovered that Parkinson’s disease was caused by a loss of dopaminergic neurons. Because dopamine itself does not cross the blood-brain barrier, L-Dopa, a chemical precursor to dopamine, was used to replenish the supply of dopamine. Amazingly, flooding the system with L-Dopa resulted in profound improvements in the symptoms of patients. Unfortunately, this improvement is temporary, and typically symptoms return after a number of years. Surgical intervention, such as making lesions to the globus pallidus internal segment (pallidotomy), has shown effectiveness in some patients. In recent years, a new therapy, deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus, has been gaining in popularity. In this treatment, an electrical stimulator is implanted in the subthalamic nucleus. When the electrical current is turned on to stimulate the nucleus, the patient’s symptoms disappear immediately. It is not known why this procedure works, or what its long-term efficacy is. Because the projection from the subthalamic nucleus is excitatory onto globus pallidus neurons, which inhibit the thalamus, it is paradoxical that such stimulation should increase motor cortex activity. One thought is that the stimulation might actually overload the subthalamic nucleus, thereby inhibiting it and disinhibiting the thalamus.

Huntington’s disease (also known as Woody Guthrie Disease) is a genetic disorder that is caused by an abnormally large number of repeats of the nucleotide sequence CAG on chromosome 4. Normal individuals have 9-35 repeats of this sequence; mutations that cause larger repeats give rise to Huntington’s disease. It is an autosomal dominant mutation, such that the offspring of a patient with Huntington’s disease has a 50% chance of inheriting the mutation. Individuals with the mutated gene will invariably develop Huntington’s disease, usually near middle age. The affected gene codes for a protein known as huntingtin, the function of which is not known. The effect of the mutated version of the gene, however, is to kill the indirect pathway neurons in the striatum, particularly those of the caudate nucleus.

Huntington’s disease is also known as Huntington’s chorea because it is characterized by a continuous, choreiform movements of the body (especially the limbs and face). In addition, the disease in advanced stages is associated with dementia. There is at present no cure or effective treatment for Huntington’s disease.

Why does the loss of indirect pathway neurons in the striatum cause the dyskinesias of Huntington’s disease (Figure 6.4)? Recall that the net effect of the indirect pathway is to inhibit motor cortex. With the loss of these neurons, the excitatory effect of the direct pathway is no longer kept in check by the inhibition of the indirect pathway. Thus, the motor cortex gets too much excitatory input from the thalamus, disrupting its normal functioning and sending involuntary movement commands to the brain stem and spinal cord. Because inappropriate motor programs are not inhibited normally, the cortex continuously sends involuntary commands for movements and movement sequences to the muscles.
Huntington’s disease (also known as Woody Guthrie Disease) is a genetic disorder that is caused by an abnormally large number of repeats of the nucleotide sequence CAG on chromosome 4. Normal individuals have 9-35 repeats of this sequence; mutations that cause larger repeats give rise to Huntington’s disease. It is an autosomal dominant mutation, such that the offspring of a patient with Huntington’s disease has a 50% chance of inheriting the mutation. Individuals with the mutated gene will invariably develop Huntington’s disease, usually near middle age. The affected gene codes for a protein known as huntingtin, the function of which is not known. The effect of the mutated version of the gene, however, is to kill the indirect pathway neurons in the striatum, particularly those of the caudate nucleus.

Huntington’s disease is also known as Huntington’s chorea because it is characterized by a continuous, choreiform movements of the body (especially the limbs and face). In addition, the disease in advanced stages is associated with dementia. There is at present no cure or effective treatment for Huntington’s disease.

Why does the loss of indirect pathway neurons in the striatum cause the dyskinesias of Huntington’s disease (Figure 6.4)? Recall that the net effect of the indirect pathway is to inhibit motor cortex. With the loss of these neurons, the excitatory effect of the direct pathway is no longer kept in check by the inhibition of the indirect pathway. Thus, the motor cortex gets too much excitatory input from the thalamus, disrupting its normal functioning and sending involuntary movement commands to the brain stem and spinal cord. Because inappropriate motor programs are not inhibited normally, the cortex continuously sends involuntary commands for movements and movement sequences to the muscles.
Like the basal ganglia, the cerebellum has historically been considered part of the motor system because damage to it produces motor disturbances. Unlike the basal ganglia, damage to the cerebellum does not result in lack of movement or poverty of movement. Instead, cerebellar dysfunction is characterized by a lack of movement coordination. Also unlike basal ganglia (and motor cortex), damage to the cerebellum causes impairments on the ipsilateral side of the body.

Ataxia is a general term used to describe the general impairments in movement coordination and accuracy that accompany cerebellar damage. There are two major forms of cerebellar ataxia.
Disturbances of posture or gait result from lesions to the vestibulocerebellum. Patients have difficulty maintaining posture because of the loss of the fine-control mechanisms programmed by cerebellar circuits that translate vestibular signals into precise, well-timed muscle contractions to counter small sways in the body. As a result, patients often develop abnormal gait and stances to compensate. For example, the feet are often spaced widely apart when the patient stands still, as this provides a more stable base to maintain balance. In addition, patients display a staggering gait, with a tendency to fall toward the side of the lesion. This gait resembles that of a drunken individual; indeed, alcohol is known to affect the firing of Purkinje cells, which may explain the loss of coordination that accompanies inebriation.
Decomposition of movement results from the loss of the cerebellum’s ability to coordinate the activity and timing of many muscle groups to produce smooth, fluid movements. Instead, cerebellar patient decompose each movement into its component parts, performing them in serial, rather than all at once in a coordinated fashion.
Dysmetria refers to the inappropriate force and distance that characterizes target-directed movements of cerebellar patients. For example, in attempting to grab a cup, they may move their hand outward with too much force or may move it too far, with the result of knocking over the cup instead of grabbing it.
Dysdiadochokinesia refers to the inability of cerebellar patients to perform rapidly alternating movements, such as rapidly pronating and supinating the hands and forearms (Figure 6.6). This diagnostic sign results from the lack of the cerebellum’s ability to coordinate the timing of muscle groups, alternately contracting and inhibiting antagonistic muscles, to produce the rhythmic movements.
Scanning speech refers to the often staccato nature of speech of cerebellar patients. The production of speech is a motor act, as muscles of the jaw, tongue, and larynx need to work in unison to produce words and sounds. Cerebellar patients have difficulty in coordinating these muscle groups appropriately, and therefore their speech tends to be slow and disjointed.
Hypotonia is another symptom of cerebellar damage. There is a decreased, pendulous myotatic reflex, as the decreased muscle resistance tends to cause the limb to swing back and forth after the initial reflex contraction.
Intention tremor refers to the increasingly oscillatory trajectory of a cerebellar patient’s limb in a target-directed movement (Figure 6.7). For example, the hand will start out on a straight path toward the target, but as it gets closer, the hand begins to move back and forth, and the patient must slow down the movement and very carefully approach the target. Note that this tremor contrasts with the resting tremor of Parkinson’s disease, which disappears when the movement is made. Intention tremor is absent when the hand is still, but appears toward the end of a target-directed movement.
Nystagmus is an oscillatory movement of the eyes, resulting from damage to the vestibulocerebellum. Recall that one function of the cerebellum is to fine-tune the gain of the vestibuloocular response. Damage to the cerebellum can disrupt this circuitry, resulting in a continuing oscillation of the eyes.
Delay in initiating movements. Cerebellar patients take longer to initiate movements, often because they must actively plan sequences of movements that are performed effortlessly by normal individuals.
In addition to movement disorders, cerebellar patients also demonstrate subtle cognitive deficits, such as an impaired ability to estimate time intervals.
The simplicity of the motor systems involved in controlling eye musculature make them ideal for illustrating the mechanisms and principals you have been studying in the preceding material on motor systems. They involve the action of few muscles and of well defined neural circuits.

We use our eyes to monitor our external environment and depend on our ocular motor systems to protect and guide our eyes. The ocular motor systems control eye lid closure, the amount of light that enters the eye, the refractive properties of the eye, and eye movements. The visual system provides afferent input to ocular motor circuits that use visual stimuli to initiate and guide the motor responses. Neuromuscular systems control the muscles within the eye (intraocular muscles); the muscles attached to the eye (extraocular muscles) and the muscles in the eyelid. Ocular motor responses include ocular reflexes and voluntary motor responses to visual and other stimuli. The complexity of the circuitry (the chain or network of neurons) controlling a ocular motor response increases with the level of processing involved in initiating, monitoring, and guiding the response.

In this chapter we will start at the level of reflex responses and move onto more complex voluntary responses in the following lecture. The eye blink reflex is the simplest response and does not require the involvement of cortical structures. In contrast, voluntary eye movements (i.e., visual tracking of a moving object) involve multiple areas of the cerebral cortex as well as basal ganglion, brain stem and cerebellar structures.
The ocular reflexes are the simplest ocular motor responses. Ocular reflexes compensate for the condition of the cornea and for changes in the visual stimulus. For example, the eye blink reflex protects the cornea from drying out and from contact with foreign objects. The pupillary light reflex compensates for changes in illumination level, whereas the accommodation responses compensate for changes in eye-to-object-viewed distance. Note that reflex responses are initiated by sensory stimuli that activate afferent neurons (e.g., somatosensory stimuli for the eye blink reflex and visual stimuli for the pupillary light reflex and accommodation responses).

In general, ocular reflexes are consensual (i.e., the response is bilateral involving both eyes). Consequently, a light directed in one eye elicits responses, pupillary constriction, in both eyes. In this chapter you will learn of the structures normally involved in performing these ocular responses and the disorders that result from damage to components of neural circuit controlling these responses.
Tactile stimulation of the cornea results in an irritating sensation that normally evokes eyelid closure (an eye blink). The response is consensual (i.e., bilateral) - involving automatic eyelid closure at both eyes.
The pupillary light reflex involves adjustments in pupil size with changes in light levels.

The reflex is consensual: Normally light that is directed in one eye produces pupil constriction in both eyes.
The direct response is the change in pupil size in the eye to which the light is directed (e.g., if the light is shone in the right eye, the right pupil constricts).
The consensual response is the change in pupil size in the eye opposite to the eye to which the light is directed (e.g., if the light is shone in the right eye, the left pupil also constricts consensually).
The pupillary light reflex allows the eye to adjust the amount of light reaching the retina and protects the photoreceptors from bright lights. The iris contains two sets of smooth muscles that control the size of the pupil (Figure 7.2).

The sphincter muscle fibers form a ring at the pupil margin so that when the sphincter contracts, it decreases (constricts) pupil size.
The dilator muscle fibers radiate from the pupil aperture so that when the dilator contracts, it increases (dilates) pupil size.
Both muscles act to control the amount of light entering the eye and the depth of field of the eye1.

The iris sphincter is controlled by the parasympathetic system, whereas the iris dilator is controlled by the sympathetic system.
The action of the dilator is antagonistic to that of the sphincter and the dilator must relax to allow the sphincter to decrease pupil size.
Normally the sphincter action dominates during the pupillary light reflex.
Recall that the optic tract carries visual information from both eyes and the pretectal area projects bilaterally to both Edinger-Westphal nuclei: Consequently, the normal pupillary response to light is consensual. That is, a light directed in one eye results in constriction of the pupils of both eyes.
The pupils normally dilate (increase in size) when it is dark (i.e., when light is removed). This response involves the relaxation of the iris sphincter and contraction of the iris dilator. The iris dilator is controlled by the sympathetic nervous system.

The pupillary dark reflex neural circuit: The pathway controlling pupil dilation involves the

retina and the optic tract fibers terminating on neurons in the hypothalamus and the
axons of the hypothalamic neurons that descend to the spinal cord to end on the
sympathetic preganglionic neurons in the lateral horn of spinal cord segments T1 to T3, which send their axons out the spinal cord to end on the
sympathetic neurons in the superior cervical ganglion, which send their
sympathetic postganglionic axons in the long ciliary nerve to the
iris dilator.
Axons from the superior cervical ganglion also innervate the face vasculature, sweat and lachrymal glands and the eyelid tarsal muscles. When the superior cervical ganglion or its axons are damaged, a constellation of symptoms, known as Horner's syndrome, result. This syndrome is characterized by miosis (pupil constriction), anhidrosis (loss of sweating), pseudoptosis (mild eyelid droop), enopthalmosis (sunken eye) and flushing of the face.
The accommodation response is elicited when the viewer directs his eyes from a distant (greater than 30 ft. away) object to a nearby object (Nolte, Figure 17-40, Pg. 447). The stimulus is an “out-of-focus” image. The accommodation (near point) response is consensual (i.e., it involves the actions of the muscles of both eyes). The accommodation response involves three actions:

Pupil accommodation: The action of the iris sphincter was covered in the section on the pupillary light reflex. During accommodation, pupil constriction utilizes the "pin-hole" effect and increases the depth of focus of the eye by blocking the light scattered by the periphery of the cornea (Nolte, Figure 17-39, Pg. 447). The iris sphincter is innervated by the postganglionic parasympathetic axons (short ciliary nerve fibers) of the ciliary ganglion (Figure 7.3).

Lens accommodation: Lens accommodation increases the curvature of the lens, which increases its refractive (focusing) power. The ciliary muscles are responsible for the lens accommodation response. They control the tension on the zonules, which are attached to the elastic lens capsule at one end and anchored to the ciliary body at the other end (Figure 7.4).
Convergence in accommodation: When shifting one's view from a distant object to a nearby object, the eyes converge (are directed nasally) to keep the object's image focused on the foveae of the two eyes. This action involves the contraction of the medial rectus muscles of the two eyes and relaxation of the lateral rectus muscles. The medial rectus attaches to the medial aspect of the eye and its contraction directs the eye nasally (adducts the eye). The medial rectus is innervated by motor neurons in the oculomotor nucleus and nerve.
The accommodation neural circuit: The circuitry of the accommodation response is more complex than that of the pupillary light reflex (Figure 7.6).

The afferent limb of the circuit includes the

retina (with the retinal ganglion axons in the optic nerve, chiasm and tract),
lateral geniculate body (with axons in the optic radiations), and
visual cortex.
Ocular motor control neurons are interposed between the afferent and efferent limbs of this circuit and include the

visual association cortex, which
determines the image is "out-of-focus"
sends corrective signals via the internal capsule and crus cerebri to the
supraoculomotor nuclei, which
is located immediately superior to the oculomotor nuclei
generates motor control signals that initiate the accommodation response
sends these control signals bilaterally to the oculomotor complex.
The efferent limb of this system has two components: the

Edinger-Westphal nucleus, which
sends its axons in the oculomotor nerve to
control the ciliary ganglion, which
sends it axons in the short ciliary nerve to
control the iris sphincter and the ciliary muscle/zonules/lens of the eye
oculomotor neurons, which
sends its axons in the oculomotor nerve to
control the medial rectus
converge the two eyes.
An excellent way to test your knowledge of the material presented thus far is by examining the effects of damage to structures within the ocular motor pathways. The observed motor loss(s) provide clues to the pathway(s) affected; and the muscle(s) and eye affected provide clues to the level of the damage.

Cranial nerve damage: Damage to cranial nerves may result in sensory and motor symptoms. The sensory losses would involve those sensations the cranial nerve normally conveys (e.g., taste from the anterior two thirds of the tongue and somatic sensations from the skin of the ear - if facial nerve is damaged). The motor losses may be severe (i.e., a lower motor neuron loss that produces total paralysis) if the cranial nerve contains all of the motor axons controlling the muscles of the normally innervated area.

The cranial nerves involved in the eye blink response and pupillary response are the optic, oculomotor, trigeminal and facial nerves.

The optic nerve carries visual information from the eye.
The oculomotor nerve contains
lower motor axons innervating
extraocular muscles: the medial, superior and inferior rectus muscles, the inferior oblique muscle,
eyelid muscle: the superior levator palpebrae,
as well as parasympathetic preganglionic axons to the ciliary ganglion.
The trigeminal nerve contains
the 1° somatosensory afferents for the face, dura, oral and nasal cavities
the lower motor axons for the jaw muscles.
The facial nerve contains
the lower motor neurons innervating the superficial muscles of the face,
the 1° gustatory afferents to the anterior tongue
the parasympathetic preganglionic axons to parasympathetic ganglia for the lachrymal and salivary glands.
Symptoms. The patient, who appears with a bloodshot left eye, complains of an inability to close his left eye. When asked to rise his eyebrows, he can only elevate the right eyebrow. When asked to close both eyes, the right eyelid closes but the left eyelid is only partially closed. Touching the right or left cornea with a wisp of cotton elicits the eye blink reflex in the right eye, but not the left eye (Figure 7.7). However, the patient reports he can feel the cotton when it touches either eye. He can smile, whistle and show his teeth, which indicates his lower facial muscles are functioning normally. Physical examination determines that touch, vibration, position and pain sensations are normal over the entire the body and face. There are no other motor symptoms.

When lower motor neurons are damaged, there is a flaccid paralysis of the muscle normally innervated. The action of the muscle will be weakened or lost depending on the extent of the damage. There will be a weakened or no reflex response and the muscle will be flaccid and may atrophy with time.

The Facial Nerve. Section of the facial nerve on one side will result in paralysis of the muscles of facial expression on the ipsilesional side of the face. There will be an inability to close the denervated eyelid voluntarily and reflexively. The eyelids may have some mobility if the oculomotor innervation to the levator is unaffected.

Symptoms. The patient complains of a badly infected left eye. When he is asked to close both eyes, both eyelids close. Touching the right cornea with a wisp of cotton elicits the eye blink reflex in the both eyes (Figure 7.9, Right). However, touching the left cornea with a wisp of cotton does not elicit the eye blink reflex in the either eye (Figure 7.9, Left). The patient cannot detect pinpricks to his left forehead. However, he reports that pinpricks to rest of his face are painful. He can blink, wrinkle his brows, smile, and whistle and show his teeth, which indicates his facial muscles are functioning normally. Physical examination determines that touch, vibration, position and pain sensations are normal over the entire the body and over the lower left and right side of his face.

The Trigeminal Nerve. Section of the trigeminal nerve will eliminate somatosensory sensation from the face and the eye blink reflex (e.g., with section of the left trigeminal nerve, light touch of the left cornea will not produce an eye blink in the left or right eye). However, light touch of the right cornea will elicit a bilateral eye blink. The effect of sectioning the trigeminal nerve is to remove the afferent input for the eye blink reflex.

Symptoms. The patient complains of pain in her left eye. Her left pupil appears dilated and is not reactive to light directed at either the left or right eye (Figure 7.10). The right pupil appears normal in size and reacts to light when it is directed in the right or left eye. Both eyelids can be elevated and lowered and both eyes exhibit normal movement. Touch, vibration, position and pain sensations are normal over the entire the body and face. There are no other motor symptoms.
Parasympathetic Innervation of the Eye. Section of the parasympathetic preganglionic (oculomotor nerve) or postganglionic (short ciliary nerve) innervation to one eye will result in a loss (motor) of both the direct and consensual pupillary light responses of the denervated eye. Section of the left short ciliary nerve or a benign lesion in the left ciliary ganglion will result in no direct response to light in the left eye and no consensual response in the left eye when light is directed on the right eye (a.k.a., tonic pupil). When the damage is limited to the ciliary ganglion or the short ciliary nerve, eyelid and ocular mobility are unaffected.
Symptoms. The patient presents with a left eye characterized by ptosis, lateral strabismus, and dilated pupil. When asked to rise his eyelids, he can only raise the lid of the right eye. When asked to close both eyes, both eyelids close fully. His left pupil does not react to light directly or consensually (Figure 7.12). When asked to look to his right, his left eye moves to a central position, but no further. The right eye is fully mobile. When the patient is asked to look straight ahead, you note his left eye remains directed to the left and depressed. Physical examination determines that touch, vibration, position and pain sensations are normal over the entire the body and face. There are no other motor symptoms.
The Oculomotor Nerve. Section of the oculomotor nerve produces a non-reactive pupil in the ipsilesional side as well as other symptoms related to oculomotor nerve damage (e.g., ptosis and lateral strabismus). Section of the oculomotor nerve on one side will result in paralysis of the superior levator palpebrae, which normally elevates the eyelid. It will also paralyze the medial, superior & inferior rectus muscles and the inferior oblique, which will allow the lateral rectus to deviate the eye laterally and the superior oblique to depress the eye. The parasympathetic preganglionic axons of the Edinger-Westphal nucleus, which normally travel in the oculomotor nerve, will be cut off from the ciliary ganglion, disrupting the circuit normally used to control the iris sphincter response to light.
Symptoms. The patient complains of reduced vision in the left eye. Pupil size in both eyes appears normal. However, both pupils do not appear to constrict as rapidly and strongly when light is directed into his left eye (Figure 7.13). That is, compared to the response to light in the left eye, light in the right eye produces a more rapid constriction and smaller pupil in both eyes. Physical examination determines that touch, vibration, position and pain sensations are normal over the entire the body and over the lower left and right side of his face.
The Optic Nerve. Partial damage of the retina or optic nerve reduces the afferent component of the pupillary reflex circuit. The reduced afferent input to the pretectal areas is reflected in weakened direct and consensual pupillary reflex responses in both eyes (a.k.a., a relative afferent pupillary defect).
Section of one optic nerve will result in the complete loss of the direct pupillary light reflex but not the consensual reflex of the blinded eye. That is, if the left optic nerve is sectioned, light directed on the left (blind) eye will not elicit a pupillary response in the left eye (direct reflex) or the right eye (consensual response). However, light directed in the right eye will elicit pupillary responses in the right eye and the left (blind) eye. The effect of sectioning one optic nerve is to remove the afferent input for the direct reflex of the blinded eye and the afferent input for the consensual reflex of the normal eye. Section of one optic tract will not eliminate the direct or consensual reflex of either eye as the surviving optic tract contains optic nerve fibers from both eyes. However, the responses to light in both eyes may be weaker because of the reduced afferent input to the ipsilesional pretectal area.
Symptoms. A patient who is suffering from the late stages of syphilis is sent to you for a neuro-ophthalmological work-up. His vision is normal when corrected for refractive errors. He has normal ocular mobility and his eyelids can be elevated and depressed at will. Examination of his pupillary responses indicates a loss of the pupillary light reflex (no pupil constriction to light in either eye) but normal pupillary accommodation response (pupil constricts when the patient's eyes are directed from a distant object to one nearby).
In the Argyll Robertson response, there is an absence of the pupillary light reflex with a normal pupillary accommodation response. The Argyll Robertson response is attributed to bilateral damage to pretectal areas (which control the pupillary light reflex) with sparing of the supraoculomotor area (which controls the pupillary accommodation reflex).

The accommodation response involves many of the structures involved in the pupillary light response and, with the exception of the pretectal area and supraoculomotor area, damage to either pathway will produce common the symptoms. The most common complaint involving the accommodation response is its loss with aging (i.e., presbyopia). Recall that presbyopia most commonly results from structural changes in the lens which impedes the lens accommodation response.
This chapter described three types of ocular motor responses (the eye blink, pupillary light and accommodation responses) and reviewed the nature of the responses and the effectors, efferent neurons, higher-order motor control neurons (if any), and afferent neurons normally involved in performing these ocular responses. Table I summarizes these structures and the function(s) of these ocular motor responses. Readers should understand the anatomical basis for disorders that result from damage to components of neural circuit controlling these responses.
Normal visual perception requires the proper functioning of ocular motor systems that control the position and movement of the eyes to focus the image of the object-of-interest (i.e., the visual target) on corresponding areas of the retinas of the two eyes. For example, in addition to producing adjustments in pupil size and lens refraction, accommodation involves the convergence of the two eyes to direct onto the foveae the images of near objects. Eye movements are also controlled to direct the eyes towards a visual target and to follow the movements of the visual target. Such eye movements are controlled by gaze systems. They coordinate the movement of the two eyes to ensure that the images on the two retinas fall on corresponding areas of the binocular field. When this fails, diplopia (double vision) results.
The extraocular muscles execute eye movements and are innervated by three cranial nerves. The muscles are attached to the sclera of the eye at one end and are anchored to the bony orbit of the eye at their opposite ends. Contraction of the muscles produce movement of the eyes within the orbit. The cranial lower motor neurons innervate these muscles and thereby control their contractions.
The extraocular muscles of the right eye and their actions. Antagonistic actions pull the eye in opposite directions whereas synergistic actions pull the eye in the same direction.
For each eye, six muscles work together to control eye position and movement. Two extraocular muscles, the medial rectus and lateral rectus, work together to control horizontal eye movements (Figure 8.1, left).

Contraction of the medial rectus pulls the eye towards the nose (adduction or medial movement).
Contraction of the lateral rectus pulls the eye away from the nose (abduction or lateral movement).
The actions of these two muscles are antagonistic: one muscle must relax while the other contracts to execute horizontal eye movements. Four other extraocular muscles working together control vertical eye movements and eye rotation around the mid-orbital axis (Figure 8.1, right). 
To direct the eye upward or downward, two muscles contract synergistically as the two antagonist muscles relax. For example, to elevate the eye while looking straight ahead, the superior rectus and inferior oblique contract together as the inferior rectus and superior oblique relax. The superior rectus and inferior oblique muscles working together pull the eye upward without rotating the eye. To depress the eye while looking straight ahead, the inferior rectus and superior oblique contract together as the superior rectus and inferior oblique relax. The inferior rectus and superior oblique working together pull the eye downward without rotating the eye.
Three cranial motor nuclei provide efferent control of the extraocular muscles. Activation of the motor neurons produces contraction of the innervated muscle.

The abducens nucleus
sends its axons in the abducens (VI cranial) nerve
controls the lateral rectus of the ipsilateral eye.
The trochlear nucleus
sends its axons in the trochlear (IV cranial) nerve
controls the superior oblique of the contralateral eye.
The oculomotor complex contains nuclei that
send axons in the oculomotor (III cranial) nerve
control
the superior levator in the eyelid of both eyes
extraocular muscles, which include the
medial rectus of the ipsilateral eye,
inferior oblique of the ipsilateral eye
inferior rectus of the ipsilateral eye
superior rectus of the contralateral eye1.
The motor neurons controlling synergist and antagonist muscles must coordinate their activities to produce the desired eye movements. Within the abducens nucleus are abducens interneurons, which send their axons into the contralateral medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF). They ascend in the MLF to end on oculomotor neurons controlling the medial rectus (Figure 8.2). The abducens interneurons coordinate the activity of the ipsilateral lateral rectus with that of the contralateral medial rectus. For example, excitation of the motor neurons in the left abducens nucleus will result in contraction of the left lateral rectus and abduction of the left eye (i.e., movement of the left eye towards the left). Excitation of the interneurons in the left abducens nucleus will excite neurons in the right oculomotor nucleus that innervate the right medial rectus. Contraction of the right medial results in adduction of the right eye (i.e., movement of the right eye towards the left). Consequently, both the right and left eyes will be directed towards the left when the left abducens nucleus is excited.

Interconnections between the trochlear nucleus and oculomotor nuclear complex coordinate their activity to allow the upward and downward movement of the eyes. These interconnecting axons appear to travel along with the fibers of the tectospinal tract (that is, they do not travel in the medial longitudinal fasciculus).
There are two functional classes of eye movements (Table I): those that stabilize the eye when the head moves or appears to move (gaze stabilization) and those that keep the image of a visual target focused on the fovea (a.k.a., foveation) when the visual target changes or moves (gaze shifting). Two gaze stabilization systems operate during head movement: the vestibulo-ocular and the optokinetic systems. Vestibulo-ocular and optokinetic movements are conjugate movements in which both eyes move in the same direction.
Vestibulo-ocular reflexes produce eye movements that compensate for head movements detected by the vestibular system. You have learned in earlier chapters how the vestibular system detects head movements and initiates the vestibulo-ocular responses.
Notice that optokinetic nystagmus is a visual-ocular response - driven by visual stimuli moving across the visual field. Vestibular nystagmus is a vestibulo-ocular response - driven by a vestibular stimulus (i.e., accelerating head movement). In humans, the smooth pursuit system predominates in producing eye movements that track moving visual targets. As the optokinetic system is vestigial in humans, it will not be covered in this lecture.
Three gaze shifting systems function during foveation: smooth pursuit, which directs the eyes to follow a moving visual target; saccade, which directs the eyes toward a visual target; and vergence, which alters the angle between the two eyes to adjust for changes in distance from the visual target. We have covered the neural control of convergence during accommodation in the previous lecture.
Voluntary or guided saccades are eye movements initiated to bring an object-of-interest into view or initiated under direction (e.g., to the command “eyes left”). Saccades consist of short, rapid, jerky (ballistic) movements of predetermined trajectory that direct the eyes toward some visual target.
The neurons in the frontal eye field (Figure 8.3)

are involved in initiating voluntary saccades that locate and focus on a particular object-of-interest.
are located posteriorly in the middle frontal gyrus.
compute the direction and amplitude of the saccade.
send their axons in the internal capsule, crus cerebri and corticotectal tract to the midbrain where they decussate and end in the superior colliculus.
The superior colliculus can initiate and control saccades independent of input from the frontal eye field. However, the motor control signals initiated by the frontal eye field and the superior colliculus differ in function.
However, when the frontal eye field is damaged, the superior colliculus will compensate for the loss following a short period of dysfunction. For example, damage to the right frontal eye field produces a transient inability to look voluntarily to the left side.
Normally the frontal eye field initiates voluntary and memory-guided saccades,
whereas the superior colliculus initiates reflex orienting saccades.
Because voluntary saccades are not, in general, initiated by visual stimuli, afferent visual control occurs only after the fact. That is, the visual system (i.e., the posterior parietal visual association cortex6 in Figure 8.3) is used to determine whether the saccade was successful in bringing the desired object into view. Consequently, the saccades consists of a series of short, fast eye movement, followed by a check by the visual system as to whether the desired visual target is in view, which may be followed by another series of brief eye movements to locate the visual target. The repeated sequence of brief, rapid eye movements and image check until the visual target is in view characterizes saccades.
Smooth pursuit (tracking) is an eye movement elicited by a moving visual target that the eyes follow voluntarily or under direction (e.g., the request to "watch the moving pen"). Pursuit movements are described to be voluntary, smooth, continuous, conjugate eye movements with velocity and trajectory determined by the moving visual target. By tracking the movement of the visual target, the eyes maintain a focused image of the target on the fovea. Notice that a visual stimulus (the moving visual target) is required to initiate this eye movement.
Temporal eye field neurons in the non-human primate (parts of Brodmann's areas 39 or MST- medial superior temporal gyrus & 37 or MT- middle temporal gyrus.

are believed to be involved in the initiation and guidance of smooth pursuit eye movements7(Figure 8.4)
compute the direction and velocity of the moving visual target.8
correspond to neurons in superior temporal-inferior parietal areas in humans. That is, damage to the temporal-parietal areas in humans produce symptoms similar to those produced by damage to MT and MST in non-human primates.
send their axons to the dorsolateral pontine nucleus (DLPN).
Consequently, the vestibular nuclei help coordinate the activities of antagonist muscles involved in eye movements during smooth pursuit and vestibule-ocular reflexes.10

Note that there are two decussations (double crossings) involved in the horizontal smooth pursuit pathway (i.e., the DLPN axons and the axons of the vestibular nuclei providing excitatory input to the abducens nucleus). Consequently, the command signals generated by the MST and MT cortical neurons result in an execution of smooth pursuit eye movement in a direction ipsilateral to these cortical neurons. Normally, a command generated by the left MST and MT cortical neurons results in both eyes tracking the movement of an object moving to the left.

Damage to the lower motor neurons that innervate an extraocular muscle results in a flaccid paralysis of the muscle, whereas damage to upper motor neurons produce deficits only in selective types of movements (e.g., smooth pursuit).
Damage to an extraocular muscle’s motor neurons results in a paralysis of the muscle that is often manifested as a strabismus (a misalignment of the two eyes). At rest (while attempting to look straight ahead), the denervated eye is deviated from its normal position by the unopposed action of the muscle that is its antagonist. The strabismus may result in double vision (diplopia) because the image falling on the retina of each eye will be from non-corresponding areas in the binocular visual fields. When the patient closes one eye, the double image is replaced by a single image.

Damage to the oculomotor nerve. As we have already covered this topic in the previous lecture, a brief summary of the effect of oculomotor nerve lesion on eye movements will be presented.

All of the extraocular muscles, except the lateral rectus and superior oblique, will be denervated and paralyzed and the patient will be unable to elevate or adduct the eye ipsilateral to the oculomotor nerve damaged.
The innervation of the superior palpebrae muscle and the ciliary ganglion (postganglionic parasympathetic innervation of the iris sphincter and ciliary muscles) will also be lost. Consequently, there will be ptosis, dilated pupil and lateral strabismus in the denervated eye.
If the left oculomotor nerve is damaged,

at rest, the eye is deviated down and laterally (is depressed and abducted) - a lateral strabismus - because the lateral rectus is unopposed.
on an attempted gaze to the right, the left medial rectus will not contract to adduct the left eye (i.e., it will not move the eye toward the nose, medially).
Consequently, at rest and during an attempted right lateral gaze, the lateral strabismus will result in a diplopia. On attempting to adduct the eye (i.e., look right or during convergence), the left lateral rectus relaxes and the left eye deviates to the midline, but not past it.

Damage to the trochlear nerve. When the trochlear nerve is damaged, the symptoms are mild. The downward and lateral movement of the eye may be weakened and may cause diplopia when reading or descending stairs. A patient may present with his head tilted because the damaged eye is extorted (i.e., rotated with top of the eye tilted away from the nose) and slightly elevated because of the paralysis of the superior oblique muscle. Tilting the head away from the affected eye brings the visual axis of the partially paralyzed eye into alignment with the visual axis of the normal eye.
Symptoms. A 65 year-old male presents with a medial strabismus of his left eye (Figure 8.6, Rest) and cannot move his left eye to the left (Figure 6, Left). His right eye has normal motility and his pupillary reflexes are normal. His vision is normal in both eyes. He has normal sensation on his face and body and no other motor symptoms.
Electrophysiological tests indicate that the left lateral rectus is responsive (i.e., normal). You conclude that the left abducens nerve has been damaged.

Damage to the abducens nerve. The lateral rectus will be denervated and paralyzed and the patient will be unable to abduct the eye. For example, if the left abducens nerve is damaged, the left eye will not abduct fully (move away from the nose, towards the left, laterally). While attempting to look straight ahead, the left eye will be deviated medially towards the nose (medial or nasal strabismus) due to the unopposed action of the medial rectus of the left eye. On attempting to gaze left, the left eye may deviate to the midpoint, but not past it, because the medial rectus of the left eye is relaxed. The patient may complain of double or blurred vision (diplopia) when looking towards the ipsilesional side (i.e., left) or when looking straight ahead.

Damage of upper motor neurons does not result in a flaccid paralysis. However, the muscle will not be activated into the response normally controlled by the upper motor neuron (e.g., voluntary saccades controlled by the frontal eye field). However, the muscle will perform reflex responses (e.g., convergence during accommodation or nystagmus during head rotation) and responses controlled by other intact ocular motor circuits.
Symptoms. A 65 year-old male presents with a left medial strabismus and cannot move both his eyes to the left (Figure 8.7). His vision and his pupillary reflexes are normal in both eyes. He has normal sensation on his face and body and no other motor symptoms.
Neural imaging tests indicate a small infarct (i.e., a lacunar stroke) in the region of the left facial colliculus. You conclude that the damaged area includes the left abducens nucleus.

Damage to the abducens nucleus. The result is an abnormality of conjugate horizontal eye movements called lateral gaze paralysis. With the eyes at rest, there is a medial strabismus in the eye ipsilateral to the damage (indicating abducens motor neuron damage). During an attempted lateral gaze, both eyes cannot be moved beyond the midline in an ipsilesional direction (i.e., toward the damage side). As the left abducens interneurons send axons to the right oculomotor neurons innervating the medial rectus of the right eye (Figure 8.2), the failure to perform a lateral gaze to the left suggests an abducens nucleus lesion. An attempted lateral gaze in a contralesional direction (away from the damaged side) is successful. Note that as the lower motor neurons (i.e., the abducens motor neurons), as well as a motor control center (i.e., the abducens interneurons), are damaged, both reflex and voluntary eye movements in the horizontal plane are affected.

An example of the effect of damage to the medial longitudinal fasciculus is presented in the Appendix.
Symptoms. A 65 year-old male was brought to the emergency room because he suddenly lost the ability to speak and could not move the right side of his body or face. He was described to be right handed and on antihypertensive medications. Examination revealed weakness in his right face, no movement in his right arm and weakness in his right leg with Babinski's sign. His speech was nonfluent. He could not move his eyes to the right when asked to "look right" (Figure 8.8). He was able to move his eyes in other directions. Sensation over the body and face was decreased on the right side. His vision and hearing appeared within the normal range.
Neural imaging tests indicate infarction of branches of the medial cerebral artery supplying the lateral surface of the left frontal cortex.
Damage to the voluntary saccades circuit. Damage to the frontal cortical eye field and the midbrain (superior colliculus) effect voluntary and reflex saccades, particularly those in the horizontal plane. Immediately following unilateral damage of the frontal cortical eye field, there is an inability to voluntarily initiate a horizontal eye movement in a direction contralateral to (away from) the side of the lesion. That is, immediately following a right frontal lobe lesion, both eyes cannot be moved voluntarily to the left beyond the midline. However, both eyes will move to the left beyond the midline to vestibular stimulation. Both eyes can also be directed to the side ipsilateral to the lesion and may tend to deviate toward the lesion when the eyes are at rest. The deficits disappear with time if the damage is localized to the frontal cortical eye field and does not involve the superior colliculus.
Symptoms. A 55 year-old male was brought to the emergency room. He was overweight and reportedly normally right-handed, a heavy smoker and drinker. He had lost consciousness during a game of basketball and when he awoke, appeared confused. When examined in the ER, he was conscious but followed no commands and could not repeat. He could mimic gestures and was able to voluntarily look to the left and right (Figure 8.9). His eyes followed a pen moving to his right with a smooth pursuit movement. However, his eye movements became jerky and ballistic at midpoint in the attempt to follow the pen as it moved to his left.
Neural imaging tests indicate infarction of branches of the left medial cerebral artery supplying the caudal superior temporal gyrus and inferior parietal gyrus.

Damage to the smooth pursuit circuit: Damage to the temporal eye field causes deficits in the ability to fixate on objects and to track them. Attempts to fixate on a target will be undermined by severe instability and wandering of the eyes. Tracking movements are jerky rather than smooth when attempting to follow an object moving in a direction toward (ipsilateral to) the side of the lesion. Note that the smooth pursuit circuit includes a double crossing and the temporal eye field controls ipsilateral eye movements (i.e., right cortex controls smooth pursuit to the right). When the temporal eye field is damaged, the two eyes may follow a visual target in an ipsilesional direction; but does so using the voluntary saccades circuit. That is, if the frontal cortical eye fields are intact, the eyes may be moved voluntarily (guided saccade) toward an object of interest ipsilateral to the impairment. However, in this case, the movements will be jerky unlike the eye movements in smooth pursuit. Tracking of visual targets contralateral to the lesion will be smooth.
This chapter reviews the ways in which voluntary eye movements are initiated by cerebral cortical activity and involve more ocular motor control structures than the simple ocular reflexes. The cortical areas initiate eye movements and work through brainstem ocular motor centers to produce a response, i.e., there are no direct connections between the cerebral cortex and the extraocular motor nuclei. The smooth pursuit system utilizes a pontine nucleus, the cerebellum, and the vestibulo-ocular reflex pathway to execute eye movements to tract visual targets. The voluntary saccades system is similar to other voluntary motor systems in engaging areas in the frontal cortex to initiate the response and in influencing the motor neurons indirectly through lower motor control structures (i.e., the vertical and horizontal gaze centers). The gaze centers function to coordinate and control the activity of motor neurons to insure that the extraocular muscles act synergistically to produce conjugate saccades.

Homeostasis is the process by which a steady state of equilibrium, or constancy, in the body with respect to physiological functions and chemical compositions of fluids and tissues is maintained. Physiological set points refer to the baseline level at which functions such as heart rate, and at which chemical compositions such as plasma sodium concentration are normally maintained. These set points are represented in the brain by specific discharge rates in neurons dedicated to the monitoring and control of specific physiological processes. Thus, separate groups of neurons are dedicated to the control of heart rate, temperature, etc., by their set point discharge rate. The hypothalamus has the greatest concentration of nuclei at which set points are encoded, monitored and controlled, and so can be considered as the key brain region for the control of homeostasis. Specific receptors and sensors throughout the body detect disruptions in the normal balance of body functions and chemistry that are produced by stress stimuli that can range from injury or infection to pain and emotional distress. These data are transmitted to the central nervous system and affect the discharge rate of set point neurons in hypothalamic nuclei (Figure 1.1). These changes in discharge rate result in altered hypothalamic efferent outflow and hence change in the functions of regulatory systems that counteract the stress stimulus and restore homeostasis. These effects include alterations in the functions of the autonomic nervous system, endocrine and immune systems, as well as alterations in behavior by hypothalamic influences on limbic brain circuitry. Each of the target systems influenced by the hypothalamus return feedback controls onto the hypothalamus completing a circuit and so establishing a homeostasis system.
The role of the hypothalamus in regulation of homeostasis is essential for survival and reproduction of the species. The importance of this function is underscored by the structural organization and connectivity of the hypothalamus as almost every major subdivision of the neuraxis communicates with the hypothalamus and is subject to its influence.

Landmarks that are visible on the ventral and medial (ventricular) surfaces of the brain define the boundaries of the hypothalamus. The rostral boundary visible on the ventral surface of the brain is formed by the optic chiasm while the mammillary bodies define the posterior boundary. Between these structures the oval prominence from the floor of the third ventricle is the tuber cinereum and evaginating from this is the median eminence which then tapers into the infundibular stalk which together form the inferior boundary of the hypothalamus. On the medial (ventricular) surface of the brain other structures contributing to the rostral boundary that are visible include the lamina terminalis and the anterior commisure. Also visible on the medial surface of the brain is the hypothalamic sulcus, which is the rostral continuation of the sulcus limitans that defines the superior boundary of the hypothalamus. Finally, the internal capsule that is only visible on coronal or horizontal sections of the brain forms the lateral boundary.

The hypothalamus is composed of three longitudinally oriented cell columns, or zones, that run the entire rostrocaudal length of the hypothalamus (Figure 1.2). These zones can be further subdivided into four nuclear groups, or regions, based on rostrocaudal position.
Zones. Immediately bordering the third ventricle, just inside of the ependymal cell lining, is a thin layer of cells that comprise the periventricular zone. This zone contains few distinct nuclei, but two that are very prominent are the arcuate nucleus and the paraventricular nucleus, which are involved in neuroendocrine and autonomic regulation. Immediately adjacent to the periventricular zone is the medial zone, which is comprised of several cytoarchitectonically distinct nuclei that are listed below. Nuclei in the medial zone are especially involved in the regulation of the autonomic nervous system as well as involved in regulation of the neuroendocrine system. Finally, the lateral zone, has few nuclei or clear landmarks, but contains important fiber pathways such as the median forebrain bundle. Demarcated by the fornix, the lateral zone is involved in regulation of the autonomic nervous system.
Regions. Each of the zones described above are further subdivided into regions based on rostrocaudal landmarks (Figure 1.4). The anterior region runs from the lamina terminalis to the caudal aspect of the optic chiasm. The portion of the anterior region that is rostral to the optic chiasm is often also referred to as the preoptic region, however this distinction is now less emphasized. The next region that is identified when proceeding caudally is the tuberal region. The margins of this region include the areas that are above and including the tuber cinereum. Finally, the posterior region is defined by the area above and including the mammillary bodies.
Nuclei. There are eleven major nuclei in the hypothalamus (Figure 1.5). The functions of many of these will be covered in further detail in later sections. However, a brief note on the organization of these can be useful. The nuclei can be grouped based on their locations in the hypothalamic zones and regions. Starting medially, the paraventricular nucleus is located in the periventricular zone and runs rostrocaudally through the anterior into the tuberal region. The arcuate nucleus also has a portion located in the periventricular zone though it also extends laterally into the medial zone. This nucleus sits in the floor of the tuberal region of the hypothalamus. Both of these nuclei, along with the supraoptic nucleus, located just above the optic chiasm in the anterior region of the medial zone extending laterally into the lateral zone, have key roles in neuroendocrine regulation. The paraventricular nucleus also has an important role in regulation of the autonomic nervous system. Additional nuclei found in the anterior region of the medial zone include the suprachiasmatic nucleus involved in circadian timing, the anterior nucleus involved in control of the autonomic nervous system, and the preoptic nucleus which also extends into the lateral zone and involved in control of the autonomic nervous system. Additional nuclei in the tuberal region of the medial zone include the dorsomedial and ventromedial nuclei, which are involved in control of behavior and of appetite, body weight and insulin secretion, respectively. Nuclei of the posterior region of the medial zone include the posterior nucleus, which is another autonomic nervous system control center, and the mammillary nuclei, which are involved in control of emotional expression and memory. Finally, the lateral tuberal complex in the tuberal region of the lateral zone is involved in control of appetite.
The hypothalamus has the most complex circuitry of any brain region. Like other brain areas there are neural interconnections. But unlike other brain areas, there are also extensive non-neural communication pathways between the hypothalamus and other brain regions and the periphery.

Neural Connections. The most noteworthy (and complex) feature of the neural connections of the hypothalamus is that except for a few exceptions, they are extensively bi-directional.

Limbic Circuits. These pathways are essential for the normal expression and control of emotions, learning and reproductive behavior. The bi-directional (afferent and efferent) pathways include the medial forebrain bundle, the fornix, the stria terminalis and the ventral amygdalofugal pathway. The medial forebrain bundle interconnects basal forebrain structures including the septal nuclei and ventral striatum with hypothalamus and structures in the brainstem tegmentum including the locus ceruleus, the parabrachial nucleus, dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus. The fornix interconnects the hippocampal formation to the septal, preoptic and medial mammillary nuclei. The stria terminalis interconnects the amygdala to the septal region and the hypothalamus especially, the preoptic and ventromedial regions. Finally, the ventral amygdalofugal pathway interconnects the amygdala, especially the central amygdaloid nucleus with the septal region and the preoptic areas of the hypothalamus. In addition to these bi-directional pathways, there are also two unidirectional efferent limbic pathways from the hypothalamus. The mammillothalamic tract projects from the mammillary nuclei to the anterior nucleus of the thalamus. The anterior nucleus of the thalamus in turn projects to the cingulate cortex, which completes the circuit of Papez by projecting back onto the subiculum of the hippocampus. The circuit of Papez was the first circuit proposed to mediate emotions and still is considered one of the chief circuits of the limbic system. The mammillotegmental tract projects from the mammillary nuclei to the brainstem tegmentum and as far caudal as the lateral gray of the spinal cord.
Sensory and Autonomic Circuits. These pathways provide visceral and somatosensory input to the hypothalamus and output of the hypothalamus to control the autonomic nervous system. These pathways are especially important for the control of feeding, insulin release and reproduction. The bi-directional pathways in this circuitry include the medial forebrain bundle noted as part of limbic circuitry above, as well as the dorsal longitudinal fasciculus. Whereas the medial forebrain bundle runs laterally through the brainstem and hypothalamus, the dorsal longitudinal fasciculus runs medially through the periventricular and periaqueductal gray matter. Both pathways bring visceral and somatic input to the hypothalamus from the nucleus of the solitary tract, the parabrachial nuclei, the reticular formation and the periaqueductal gray. The medial forebrain bundle also brings monoaminergic fibers containing noradrenaline and serotonin into the hypothalamus from various brainstem nuclei including the raphe nuclei that have key roles in modulating neuroendocrine functions. More rostral projections of these monoaminergic fibers as well as peptide-containing efferent fibers that originate in the hypothalamus and join the medial forebrain bundle as it ascends into the orbital cortex, insula and frontal cortex are involved in the control of motivation. Descending efferent projections of the hypothalamus through these pathways terminate on parasympathetic nuclei of the brainstem such as the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus. Unidirectional afferent input to the hypothalamus is derived from the spinohypothalamic tract and the retino-hypothalamic tract. The spinohypothalamic tract is a component of the anterolateral system of somatosensory fibers that also includes the spinothalamic tract and provides input concerning pain as well as input necessary for orgasm. The retino-hypothalamic tract provides input to the suprachiasmatic nucleus that is used to entrain circadian rhythms to the light-dark cycle. Finally, unidirectional efferent pathways from the hypothalamus include the hypothalamo-spinal tract, which projects onto brainstem and finally spinal preganglionic sympathetic and parasympathetic neurons in the spinal intermediolateral cell column, and a histamine projection to thalamus and cortex from the inferior lateral tuberal region that regulates the sleep-wake cycle.

Neuro-Humoral Connections. Unlike any other brain structure the hypothalamus both sends and receives information by way of the blood stream. There are two pathways that comprise the neuro-humoral connections of the hypothalamus.

The Pituitary. These pathways include the hypophyseal-portal system of blood vessels that surround the median eminence, the infundibulum and pituitary gland. The details of this system in neuroendocrine function will comprise the third chapter of this section.
Sensory and Autonomic Circuits. These pathways provide visceral and somatosensory input to the hypothalamus and output of the hypothalamus to control the autonomic nervous system. These pathways are especially important for the control of feeding, insulin release and reproduction. The bi-directional pathways in this circuitry include the medial forebrain bundle noted as part of limbic circuitry above, as well as the dorsal longitudinal fasciculus. Whereas the medial forebrain bundle runs laterally through the brainstem and hypothalamus, the dorsal longitudinal fasciculus runs medially through the periventricular and periaqueductal gray matter. Both pathways bring visceral and somatic input to the hypothalamus from the nucleus of the solitary tract, the parabrachial nuclei, the reticular formation and the periaqueductal gray. The medial forebrain bundle also brings monoaminergic fibers containing noradrenaline and serotonin into the hypothalamus from various brainstem nuclei including the raphe nuclei that have key roles in modulating neuroendocrine functions. More rostral projections of these monoaminergic fibers as well as peptide-containing efferent fibers that originate in the hypothalamus and join the medial forebrain bundle as it ascends into the orbital cortex, insula and frontal cortex are involved in the control of motivation. Descending efferent projections of the hypothalamus through these pathways terminate on parasympathetic nuclei of the brainstem such as the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus. Unidirectional afferent input to the hypothalamus is derived from the spinohypothalamic tract and the retino-hypothalamic tract. The spinohypothalamic tract is a component of the anterolateral system of somatosensory fibers that also includes the spinothalamic tract and provides input concerning pain as well as input necessary for orgasm. The retino-hypothalamic tract provides input to the suprachiasmatic nucleus that is used to entrain circadian rhythms to the light-dark cycle. Finally, unidirectional efferent pathways from the hypothalamus include the hypothalamo-spinal tract, which projects onto brainstem and finally spinal preganglionic sympathetic and parasympathetic neurons in the spinal intermediolateral cell column, and a histamine projection to thalamus and cortex from the inferior lateral tuberal region that regulates the sleep-wake cycle.

Neuro-Humoral Connections. Unlike any other brain structure the hypothalamus both sends and receives information by way of the blood stream. There are two pathways that comprise the neuro-humoral connections of the hypothalamus.

The Pituitary. These pathways include the hypophyseal-portal system of blood vessels that surround the median eminence, the infundibulum and pituitary gland. The details of this system in neuroendocrine function will comprise the third chapter of this section.
It has been highlighted several times in this section that the overarching function of the hypothalamus is the integration of body functions for the maintenance of homeostasis. The multiplicity of functions that are entailed in this level of integration should be intuitively obvious. The table below lists many of these functions and the nuclear groups that are most closely associated their execution.
Thermoregulation, Neuroendocrine control, Feeding and Satiety. The details concerning thermoregulation, neuroendocrine function, and control of feeding will be the subject of later chapters.

Biological Timing and Rhythms. Circadian timing refers to the daily fluctuations that occur in hormone levels, body temperature, sleep-wake cycle, etc.; while circannual timing refers to fluctuations in function that occur on a yearly cycle. The chief hypothalamic nucleus involved in this process is the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), which can be considered as the body’s master clock. The neurons in the SCN have an intrinsic rhythm of discharge activity that will re-cycle in the absence of light at 25 hour intervals. This activity is an intrinsic property of SCN neurons that can be maintained for days while the cells are maintained in culture. Input to the SCN from the retinohypothalamic tract resets and entrains the activity of SCN neurons to the daily 24 hour light-dark cycle by regulating the transcription of the light-sensitive clock, bmal, period (per) and cryptochrome (cry) genes. The retino-hypothalamic tract is a non-rod, non-cone dependent input to the SCN from a subset of retinal ganglion cells that are directly activated by light interacting with the pigment melanopsin. The SCN has projections into multiple hypothalamic nuclei that control the specific functions that show daily or annual rhythms. Thus, the SCN is considered as a master pacemaker that regulates the functions of multiple intra- and extra-hypothalamic slave oscillators. One extraordinary example of an extra-hypothalamic slave oscillator is the induction of fetal circadian timing from the mother. A specific, and perhaps more concrete example of this circuitry is illustrated by the regulation of melatonin secretion. Activation of the SCN by light results in increased input to the paraventricular nucleus, which in turn activates sympathetic pre-ganglionic neurons in the T1-T2 spinal intermediolateral cell column. These neurons inhibit the superior cervical ganglion which sends noradrenergic innervation into the pineal gland that inhibits the release of melatonin. With the onset of darkness, this inhibition is removed, and so melatonin secretion increases through a disinhibition process (Figure 1.8).
There are two major classes of disorders in circadian timing, phase shifting and entrainment failure, both of which manifest themselves as sleep disorders. The most common phase shift disorder is the rapid time-zone change syndrome, or jet lag, characterized by daytime sleepiness and nighttime insomnia. The molecular biology of this disorder is becoming well-defined. Circadian disruption is more sensitive to advances in local time than to delays. Circadian expression of mPer in SCN reacts rapidly to an advance in light onset whereas expression of mCry advances slowly, at a maximum rate of 3hours/cycle. It is only when the expression of both genes resume their baseline parallel expression that the behavioral and light:dark cycles become re-aligned. In contrast, mPer and mCry expression cycles react rapidly and in parallel with a delay in light cycle, such that a complete reset is achieved within one cycle. A second type of phase shift disorder is delayed sleep phase syndrome commonly seen in adolescents and possibly linked to an endocrine-mediated desensitization of SCN pacemakers to phase-advancing stimuli. Finally, advanced sleep phase syndrome, characterized by onset of sleep in the early evening followed by very early pre-dawn awakening is commonly observed in the elderly and is associated with a missense mutation in mPer2. Entrainment failure is often, though not always, observed in the blind. It is important to remember that the retino-hypothalamic tract has nothing to do with vision and so can be preserved in the blind, and may also be absent in those with vision.

It has become increasingly evident that circadian timing can have tremendous impact on the susceptibility to disease as well as conversely, to the optimal timing of curative therapy (Figure 1.9). Chronomorbidity refers to the observation that certain disorders characteristically show peak prevalence at particular times of the day, whereas Chronotherapeutics is the application of therapies at the time of day when their effects can be expected to have the greatest impact. The best current example of effective chronotherapeutics is that treatment of seasonal affective disorder (a form of entrainment failure) is successfully treated with bright light therapy only when applied during the morning hours.
The hypothalamus is the key brain site for integration of multiple biologic systems to maintain homeostasis. Neurons in the hypothalamus discharge in relation to multiple physiologic indices and change discharge rate with changes in these indices, thus establishing set points. The three major systems controlled by the hypothalamus for maintenance of homeostasis are the autonomic nervous system, the neuroendocrine system, and the limbic system.

The hypothalamus has well defined anatomical boundaries. Different regions of the hypothalamus are especially associated with the control of specific physiological subsystems.

The broad scope of brain regions affected by the hypothalamus is reflected by a very widespread extent of connectivity of the hypothalamus to other brain areas and by unique neuro-humoral communication pathways.

One key function of the hypothalamus is regulation of body functions in concert with the daily light:dark cycle. Intrinsic timing mechanisms of neurons in the suprachiasmatic nucleus controlled by the expression of the light sensitive clock, bmal, per, and cry genes establish the master pacemaker of the body. The activity of these cells is set in phase to light by inputs from a special subset of non-rod, non-cone dependent melanopsin-containing retinal ganglion cells via the retino-hypothalamic tract.
The Neuroendocrine System represents the second, and last, major efferent system of the hypothalamus that we will consider in detail in this section. The third efferent system, the limbic system, will be covered in a later chapter. The information transfer in the hypothalamic-neuroendocrine pathways are unique in that they are largely blood borne as opposed to neurally mediated. Traditionally, the neuroendocrine system has been considered in two parts, that part dealing with the posterior pituitary, or neurohypophysis; and that part dealing with the anterior pituitary, or adenohypophysis. However, it is increasingly clear that the immune system also has such an important effect on neuroendocrine regulation that it must now also be considered as a special “diffuse” neuroendocrine component.
The posterior pituitary is often termed the neurohypophysis because the hormones of this part of the pituitary are released directly from the axonal endings of their source neurons into the circulation (Figure 2.1). The hypothalamic nuclei in which the cell bodies of these neurons reside are the supraoptic and the paraventricular nuclei. As we discussed in the previous chapter, both nuclei are composed of multiple cell types, but it is only the large magnocellular neurons that produce the hormones and that send axons into the neurohypophysis. The pathway from the hypothalamus to the posterior pituitary is called the hypothalamo-neurohypophyseal tract. It is along this tract that the hormones oxytocin and vasopressin (also called antidiuretic hormone or ADH) are cleaved from their prohormones and prepared for release in vesicles along with their co-peptides neurophysin I (oxytocin) and neurophysin II (vasopressin). Although the two amino acid peptides (nonapeptides) only differ by two amino acids, a given neuron produces only one or the other type of hormone at a time, but not both simultaneously. Release of hormones into the circulation of the posterior pituitary occurs following various neural stimuli and so the functions of this portion of the neuroendocrine system is characterized by reflexes with neural input and hormonal output.
Oxytocin. Oxytocin has no diurnal rhythm but is released in three reflexes following the influence of several different types of stimuli.

In the milk let-down reflex (Figure 2.2) the tactile stimuli applied to the breast by the suckling infant are transmitted to the hypothalamus by the spinohypothalamic tract directly to the preoptic and paraventricular nuclei to excite the magnocellular neurons and so provoke the release of hormone into the circulation. Oxytocin travels through the bloodstream acts on the mammary glands to cause milk release so that about 13 seconds later milk enters the ducts of the gland. Other non-tactile stimuli can also provoke this reflex including the sound of the baby crying, visual cues, anxiety, and other stimuli that increase hypothalamic sympathetic tone.
During parturition oxytocin induces powerful contractions of the uterine myometrium (Figure 2.2). Parturition itself is not induced by oxytocin, but the strength and frequency of the contractions of labor are enhanced by oxytocin. Pressure on the cervix or uterine wall are transmitted to the hypothalamus by the spinohypothalamic tract inducing hormone release as above which enters the blood acting to enhance contractions and so closing a positive feedback loop. Once the baby is born the cervical pressure is released and contractions cease. Synthetic oxytocin (Pitocin) is often given to increase uterine tone and control uterine bleeding following birth and after some gynecological procedures.
Oxytocin also produces contractions of the uterine myometrium and smooth muscles of the male and female reproductive tract that are important for sperm transport. The stimuli in this reflex are inputs from CNS sympathetic pathways activated with sexual activity.
Vasopressin. Vasopressin, also known as arginine vasopressin (AVP), acts on V2 receptors on the contraluminal surface of the distal tubular epithelium primarily in the collecting duct of the kidney to increase permeability and allow reabsorption of water and electrolytes into the circulation (Figure 2.3). Vasopressin has a diurnal peak late at night and early in the morning and a trough in the mid-afternoon. Sensors for plasma osmolality control the evoked secretion of vasopressin by magnocellular neurons in the paraventricular and supraoptic nuclei of the hypothalamus. The magnocellular neurons have intrinsic osmoreceptors in their plasma membrane and also receive afferent inputs from osmo-sensitive neurons in the organum vasculosum of the lamina terminalis. Sensors in the subfornical organ for angiotensin II also stimulate the release of vasopressin. Angiotensin II in the blood is elevated following the release of renin from the kidney in response to a decrease in blood pressure. Finally, the carotid and aortic arch bodies that signal the hypothalamus via the vagus and glossopharyngeal nerves via relay in the solitary nucleus also detect a decrease in blood oxygen or pressure and promote the release of vasopressin.
Disorders of the Posterior Pituitary

Oxytocin: No disorders have been acknowledged.
Diabetes Insipidus results due to insufficient vasopressin secretion in response to normal physiologic stimuli (central or neurogenic diabetes insipidus) or due to failure of the kidney to respond to vasopressin (nephrogenic diabetes insipidus). Neoplastic or infiltrative lesions, pituitary or hypothalamic surgery, severe head injuries, and idiopathic causes in that order most frequently cause central diabetes insipidus. The second two may remit spontaneously due to revascularization of the hypothalamo-pituitary stalk. The symptoms include large amounts of dilute urine, dehydration and thirst. Treatment is by hormone replacement.
Syndrome of Inappropriate AVP Secretion (SIADH) is associated with some central nervous system disorders including trauma, encephalitis, cerebrovascular accident and acute psychosis. Some drugs, including vincristine, some general anesthetics and antidepressants release or potentiate the effects of vasopressin. Elevated vasopressin also occurs in some tumors following ectopic synthesis and release. Clinical signs include hyponatremia, edema, hypovolemic features, hyperosmolality of the urine, and hyperlipidemia. Treatment requires fluid restriction and then identification and treatment of the underlying cause.
The Anterior Pituitary is an endocrine gland controlled by the hypothalamus in several fundamentally different fashions than is the posterior pituitary. None of the six major hormones released by the adenohypophysis are of hypothalamic origin, rather all are synthesized in cells embryonically derived from Rathke’s pouch in the anterior pituitary itself and released directly into the blood stream. Releasing- and release-inhibiting hormones that are synthesized in the arcuate, paraventricular, periventricular and supraoptic nuclei of the hypothalamus control anterior pituitary hormone secretion. Parvocellular neurons in these nuclei send their axons into the tuberoinfundibular tract and terminate on a capillary bed of the superior hypophyseal arteries located around the base of the median eminence. A given parvocellular neuron may release one or more releasing factor into these capillaries that coalesce into 6 to 10 small straight veins that form the hypophyseal-portal blood circulation which descends along the infundibular stalk and forms a second capillary plexus around the anterior pituitary. The releasing-hormones gain access to the five distinct types of target cells in the anterior pituitary from this plexus and stimulate anterior pituitary hormone release back into the capillary bed that then drains into the systemic circulation and transports the hormones to peripheral target tissues. The target tissues are stimulated to produce final mediator hormones that induce the physiological changes in peripheral tissues typical of each hormone.
Control of secretion of the releasing factors, pituitary hormones and peripheral endocrine hormones is tightly inter-related in a set of feedback loops (Figure 2.5). The ultra-short feedback loop is mediated by the hypothalamic releasing factors limiting their own release by a type of autocrine effect on targets in the hypothalamus. Inhibition of releasing-factor secretion by pituitary hormones comprises short loop feedback. Finally, peripheral hormone inhibition of pituitary secretion comprises the direct long-loop feedback and inhibition on hypothalamic secretion of the releasing factors comprises the indirect long-loop feedback.
Growth hormone (GH) is secreted from somatotrophs, which comprise about half of the cells in the anterior pituitary (Figure 2.6). GH release is characteristically pulsatile being very low most of the day except following meals, exercise, during slow wave sleep, and at other individualized intervals. GH is necessary for normal linear growth and greatly influences intermediary metabolism by way of its induction of somatomedins (insulin-like growth factors, IGF) from target tissues most notably including the liver, chondrocytes, kidney, muscle, pituitary and the gastrointestinal tract. The hypothalamic regulation of GH secretion is illustrative of the mechanisms that govern all hormones of the anterior pituitary. Release is controlled by Growth hormone releasing hormone (GHRH) a 39 amino acid peptide that is primarily synthesized in the arcuate nucleus. GHRH release from the arcuate nucleus is stimulated by inputs from other brain regions using the neurotransmitters norepinephrine, dopamine, serotonin, acetylcholine and the enkephalins. Release of GHRH is inhibited by somatostatin and very importantly, by the actions of GH and IGF. The regulation of GHRH release by somatostatin is an example of ultra-short loop feedback, regulation of release by GH is an example of short-loop feedback, and regulation by IGF is an example of indirect long loop feedback.

Prolactin. Prolactin is necessary for lactation and is secreted by pituitary lactotrophs, which constitute 15 to 20 percent of the cells in the normal pituitary. Control of prolactin secretion by the hypothalamus is unique to that of the other anterior pituitary hormones in that under normal circumstances it is restrained and not elicited. Dopamine released from the arcuate and paraventricular nuclei acts on D2 receptors to increase adenyl cyclase in lactotrophs and inhibit prolactin release. Increases in plasma prolactin induces increased levels of dopamine in the arcuate and paraventricular nuclei and so establishes short-loop feedback.

Luteinizing hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone control the gonads in men and women. These hormones are secreted by the gonadotrophs, which comprise about 10 percent of the adenohypophysis. Luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) is the hypothalamic factor that controls release of the gonadotrophs and primarily is released itself from the arcuate nucleus. Feedback regulation of LHRH is provided by low levels of estrogen in females and by testosterone in males.

Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) is secreted by about 5 percent of the cells in the pituitary called thyrotrophs and regulates thyroid function. Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) is found in the highest concentrations in the medial division of the paraventricular nucleus. The thyroid hormones thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3) inhibit TSH production and release at the level of the pituitary (direct long loop) and inhibit the release of TRH at the level of the hypothalamus (indirect long loop).

Adrenocorticotropin (ACTH) controls glucocorticoid function of the adrenal cortex. ACTH is produced by the corticotrophs that comprise the remaining 15 percent of pituitary cells as part of the larger pro-opiomelanocortin gene product from which γ-melanocyte stimulating hormone and ß-endorphin are also derived. ACTH is released in pulses with an overall circadian rhythm peak at around 4 AM and a trough in the early evening. Corticotropin releasing-factor (CRH) is the primary but not the only hypothalamic factor that regulates ACTH release. CRH is primarily found in the paraventricular nucleus. The release of both ACTH and CRH are inhibited by the hormone cortisol secreted from the adrenal, and the release of both are strongly stimulated by stress.

Disorders of every hormone of the anterior pituitary have been identified and are characterized by either a hypo-secretion or over-secretion following various lesions, trauma, or tumors.
Acromegaly and Gigantism results from excess GH in adults and in children, respectively. More than a cosmetic disease, these conditions are associated with multiple system problems such as headaches, poor vision, sinus congestion, congestive heart failure, impotence, kidney stones, paresthesias, weakness, and arthritis and is associated with a shortened life span.
Dwarfism results from insufficient GH in children, while decreased GH in adults is usually cryptic. However, GH supplements are finding utility in restoring vigor in aged individuals.
Hyperprolactinaemia has many causes, is evidenced by hypogonadism and/or galactorrhea, and associated with pituitary adenomas (the most common type of functional pituitary adenoma), hypothalamic or renal disease.
Prolactin deficiency is evidenced by an inability to lactate and often the first sign panhypopituitarism resulting from pituitary infarction in the post-partum period (Sheehan’s Syndrome)
Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism occurs as a central, congenital or inherited disorder (Kallmann’s Syndrome) and an acquired secondary disorder. In Kallmann’s Syndrome the LHRH-producing cells of the hypothalamus fail to migrate during development from the olfactory placode into the brain. Acquired deficits occur as a result of hyperprolactinemia (adenoma), anorexia, starvation, and stress.
Hypergonadotropism can occur with pituitary tumors as well as from ectopic hormone-producing tumors of the lung, liver and germinal cell lines.
Hypothyroidism can result due to failure of the thyroid gland (primary) or following pituitary or hypothalamic disease (secondary). The primary form of the disease will result in hypertrophy of the thyrotrophs that can result in pituitary enlargement resulting in visual field deficits.
Pituitary (TSH-induced) Hyperthyroidism is usually not a cause of hyperthyroidism but may occur in two conditions. First, pituitary macroadenomas are associated with overproduction of the alpha subunit of TSH. Second, pituitary resistance to thyroid hormone can occur.
Cushing’s disease is characterized by central distribution of adipose, muscle weakness, purplish striae, hypertension, osteoporosis, fatigue and psychiatric changes. Primary Cushing’s disease. These usually are the result of microadenomas of the pituitary in over 90 percent of cases and result due to macroadenomas in most of the remaining cases. Ectopic ACTH production is not uncommon with some fast-growing tumors such as oat cell carcinoma of the lung, but in these conditions the physical signs of hypercortisolemia are less pronounced. Rather, hypokalemia, muscle weakness, weight loss and hyperpigmentation characterize patients. Ectopic ACTH produced by slower growing tumors show more characteristics of typical Cushing’s disease. Overproduction of CRF is a rare cause of Cushing’s disease. (Figure 2.7)
ACTH deficiency is also called secondary adrenal insufficiency. It may reversibly occur following prolonged glucocorticoid administration.
Important bi-directional interactions between the immune system and the nervous and neuroendocrine systems have become defined over the past twenty years (Figure 2.8). These interactions account for modification of immune system function by nervous system activity and contrawise, modification of behavior, metabolism and neuroendocrine function by activity within the immune system compartment. The cascade of behavioral responses induced by activation of the immune system is termed the acute phase response, while the influence of brain activity on immunity has been termed psychoneuroimmunology.
The Acute Phase Response. The acute phase response is a constellation of behavioral and physiological changes that occur following invasion of the body by pathogens or tissue injury that we know as “feeling sick”, and thus also called sickness behavior. Fever is one component of the acute phase response (see previous chapter). Other components include an increase in slow wave sleep, anorexia, affective and cognitive impairment, decreased social and sexual behavior and lowered pain threshold. In addition, there are changes in blood chemistry including an increase in C-reactive protein, haptoglobin, serum amyloid A, a2-macroglobulin, fibrinogen, plasma zinc and copper, and a decrease in plasma iron. Changes in these proteins and elements are mediated by the liver following neural input that arises in the hypothalamus. These changes are geared to reallocate energy resources to the generation of fever and the proliferation of immune cells and to induce as hostile an environment to invading pathogens as possible. There are four primary cytokine mediators of this response.

Interleukin-1β (IL-1β) is the chief mediator of the acute phase response following infection. There are two additional members of the IL-1 family, IL-1a and IL-1 receptor antagonist, but neither of these have any effect in producing the acute phase response. IL-1β exerts its effects within the CNS by induction of the enzyme cyclo-oxygenase type 2 (COX2) in endothelial cells of the vasculature at the circumventricular organs, especially the organum vasculosum of the lamina terminals (Figure 2.9). Induction of this enzyme results in the generation of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) that passes through the fenestrated blood brain barrier and binds to the type 4 prostanoid receptor (EP4). Receptor binding raises cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) in neurons of the hypothalamus and brainstem, most notably the preoptic anterior, paraventricular, and A2 nuclei, which induces fever, activates the neuroendocrine axis and stimulates hepatic acute phase protein synthesis and release. An alternate mechanism that may contribute to other aspects of sickness behavior is the binding of IL-1β to the receptors on the subdiaphragmatic vagus.
Projections from the nucleus tractus solitarius to the hypothalamus, hippocampus, amygdala and other limbic sites are proposed to induce somnolence, anorexia, irritability and cognitive impairment. This pathway and the central release of PGE2 has also been suggested to induce the mirror-like CNS generation of cytokines that is observed with activation of the immune system. The CNS sources of cytokines, such as IL-1β, interferons, and TNF are from activated astrocytes, lie in the figure at right, as well as from microglia and neurons.
Interleukin-6 does not induce the acute phase response when injected alone, yet nevertheless is the most potent agent for prolonged induction of acute phase proteins when injected to the brain of animals already primed by interleukin-1. Most likely these effects are because IL-6 receptor (IL-6R) is expressed at low levels in non-primed animals, but the receptor is up-regulated during induction of sickness responses. Thus, it has been proposed that IL-6 functions to sustain the acute phase response that is triggered by IL-1β. Activation of the neuroendocrine axis by IL-1ß and IL-6 results in elevated plasma cortisol that in turn suppresses COX2 and IL-6R expression. This feedback is essential for termination of the acute phase response as the illness resolves.
The interferons (type I) and tumor necrosis factor. These agents are much less potent than those above, yet play especially prevalent roles in the sickness responses with viral and neoplastic illnesses.
Other hormones produced by lymphoid cells include a whole constellation we have already discussed including GH, Prolactin, ACTH, TSH, β-endorphin and enkephalins that may also be involved in the signal pathways between the immune system and the CNS.
Psychoneuroimmunology refers to the pathways that underlie brain-induced modifications of immune system function. These pathways include the neuroendocrine system as well as inputs to all lymphoid tissues from the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems. Immunological responses can be conditioned like any other biological response and so, components of many common diseases ranging from asthma to cancer have been correlated to various behavioral traits.
Stress. Demographic studies of merchant marine from World War I detected high early mortality rates from a variety of causes. This suggested the idea that chronic stress is an immune suppressant. Cortisol was subsequently shown to be a powerful direct inhibitor of all lymphoid process and so became a widely used anti-inflammatory drug. Later stressful stimuli adequate to induce CRF release from the hypothalamus were experimentally shown to result in immune suppression. However, as research has progressed it has become clear that stress per se is not always counter productive to immunity. Low levels of stress act to redistribute lymphoid cells from storage compartments such as the spleen into the circulation. Similarly, low levels of cortisol, such as those normally provoked by infection, act to focus the immune response by creation of a type of lateral inhibition so that only those cell lines with the most focused epitopes and so most strongly activated to proliferate continue to expand. Thus, the stress response can be subdivided into eustress, which is beneficial to immunity, and distress, which is immunosuppressive. (Figure 2.10)

Circadian Susceptibility to Disease is a direct consequence of the nervous system’s impact on immunological functions (Figure 2.11). The levels of hormones and tone in the autonomic nervous system fluctuate through the course of the day. Immunological function tends to be most suppressed early in the morning when the body is at its lowest level of sympathetic tone and highest level of adrenocorticotropic activity. In converse, immunological function is at its peak in the evening as sympathetic tone peaks. Patients almost always feel their best in the early morning hours and feel their worst in the evening. Paradoxically, the peak in autonomic and neuroendocrine function in the evening results in peak physical performance in healthy individuals at this same time of day.
Secretion of the posterior pituitary hormones is directly from magnocellular neurons of the paraventricular and supraoptic nuclei into the circulation. These neurons project axons into the posterior pituitary via the hypothalamo-neurohypophyseal tract and terminate on a capillary bed of the inferior hypophyseal artery. Control of release in this system is under neural control and so this represents a reflex system with neural input and hormonal output.

Secretion of anterior pituitary hormones is driven by the influence of releasing, or release-inhibiting hormones (factors) that are synthesized in parvocellular neurons of the supraoptic, paraventricular, arcuate and periventricular hypothalamic nuclei. These neurons project axons in the tuberoinfundibular tract onto a capillary bed of the superior hypophyseal artery at the base of the median eminence. These capillaries coalesce into the hypophyseal portal veins, which descend to the anterior pituitary and form a second capillary bed where the anterior pituitary hormones are released. The anterior pituitary hormones diffuse to peripheral targets to provoke release of endocrine hormones that induced tissue effects. Control of release in this system is via feedback of releasing-hormones, anterior pituitary hormones, and peripheral endocrine hormones onto hypothalamic and pituitary cells in a series of feedback loops. This system thus represents a hormone-and neural-evoked and hormone-output reflex.

The immune system provokes neural and neuroendocrine responses in an acute phase “sickness” response to illness or injury. The immune system is also influenced by neural activity.
Because many students have been led to believe that the autonomic nervous system is relatively primitive, most have concluded that normal regulation of this system occurs at ganglionic, or at best, spinal levels. Thus, they are often quite surprised to discover that dysfunction of the brain is typically accompanied by autonomic dysfunction that can be life-threatening. For example, patients with spinal transection can have severe hypertensive crises provoked by a full bladder, impacted colon, or even stroking of the skin. This is not to say that the spinal cord and autonomic ganglia do not play important roles in autonomic regulation. But, that the organization of autonomic output takes place at supraspinal levels.

Extensive interconnection occurs between sites receiving visceral inputs and that control autonomic efferent outputs, between sites for the control of sympathetic versus parasympathetic nervous system output, and between sites for autonomic control and somatic, endocrine and limbic circuitry. Collectively, this set of interconnections is termed the central autonomic network.
The central autonomic network is composed of both hypothalamic and extra-hypothalamic nuclei. Some of these sites regulate sympathetic outflow whereas others regulate parasympathetic outflow. This structure was first revealed in lesion studies that revealed multisynaptic connections descending from the hypothalamus and midbrain to preganglionic neurons in the brainstem and spinal cord. Similarly, connections from various limbic brain structures, most especially the amygdala, through the hypothalamus have been demonstrated. The net result of this network in full operation is the induction of autonomic responses to visceral and somatic stress stimuli, such as elevated heart rate and blood pressure with the onset of pain. Alternatively, chronic hypertension in type “A” or stressed individuals represents increased central autonomic outflow in response to increased limbic system input. Hierarchy in the autonomic network results in the loops from the brainstem to spinal cord being responsible for rapid short-term regulation of the autonomic nervous system, hypothalamic-brainstem-spinal cord pathways serving longer-term, metabolic and reproductive regulation, and finally limbic system-hypothalamic-brainstem-spinal cord loops serving anticipatory autonomic regulation.

Hypothalamic Structures. The single most important hypothalamic nucleus of the central autonomic network is the paraventricular nucleus (PVN). The PVN has two morphological classes of neurons that fall into three functional categories. The first morphological class is comprised of magnocellular (big) neurons. These neurons contain vasopressin and oxytocin and project their axons into the posterior pituitary where these hormones are released directly into the blood stream. The second morphological class is comprised of parvocellular (small) neurons. The parvocellular PVN neurons also include a neuroendocrine-related functional subset that project to the median eminence and secrete releasing hormones into the hypophyseal portal blood stream for control of anterior pituitary hormone secretion. More on these two functional groups will be covered in the next chapter. Finally, a group of parvocellular neurons comprise the third functional group of PVN neurons with these involved in central autonomic control.

There are three types of pre-autonomic parvocellular neurons (Types A, B and C) separable based on anatomical and physiological criteria, as well as based on subnuclear location within the PVN. Pre-autonomic PVN neurons project directly onto preganglionic autonomic neurons in the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus, the autonomic relay nuclei of the brainstem (A5, rostral ventral lateral medulla) and even directly to the intermediolateral spinal columns. These projections descend ipsilaterally through the brainstem and spinal cord with four points of decussation (supramammillary, pontine tegmentum, commissural part of the nucleus of the solitary tract (the major one), lamina X of the spinal cord) so that ultimately innervation is bilateral but with an ipsilateral dominance. Thus, the PVN, unlike any other brain site, has direct influence over both sympathetic and parasympathetic outflow. Furthermore, the PVN receives direct sympathetic and parasympathetic afferent inputs from trigeminal pars caudalis (sympathetic) and the nucleus of the solitary tract (parasympathetic). The PVN therefore is the only brain site in a closed efferent-afferent reflex loop with both the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems.

Other hypothalamic nuclei in the central autonomic network include the dorsomedial nucleus, the lateral hypothalamic area, the posterior hypothalamic nucleus and the mammillary nucleus. These nuclei send and receive projections from the PVN, the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus, the central gray matter, the parabrachial nucleus, the nucleus of the solitary tract, the lateral and ventral medulla and the intermediolateral spinal columns. The lateral hypothalamus is especially involved in cardiovascular control as well as in control of feeding, satiety and insulin release.
Extra-hypothalamic Structures. Numerous brain structures were itemized above as innervation targets of the hypothalamic structures of the central autonomic network. These extra-hypothalamic sites can be roughly divided into those associated with control of the two components of the autonomic nervous system. The sites associated with control of sympathetic outflow include the norepinephrine-containing neurons of the dorsal mesencephalon (locus ceruleus) and the rostral and caudal ventrolateral medulla (the A5 and A1 regions) and the serotonin-containing neurons of the pontine and medullary raphe nuclei. The extra-hypothalamic sites associated with control of parasympathetic outflow include the central nucleus of the amygdala, the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus, the nucleus ambiguous, the raphe nuclei, the periaqueductal gray, and the parabrachial nucleus. Finally, limbic cortices, including the cingulate, orbitofrontal, insular and rhinal cortices, and the hippocampus influence both sets of autonomic outflow.
The hypothalamus is interconnected with the remainder of the central autonomic network by way of three major pathways: the dorsal longitudinal fasciculus, the medial forebrain bundle, and the mammillotegmental tract.

The principal pathway of the hypothalamus in the central autonomic network is the dorsal longitudinal fasciculus (DLF). The DLF originates in the region of the paraventricular nucleus and descends along the most medial aspect of the third ventricle through the periaqueductal gray and mesencephalic reticular formation. The DLF continues caudally in the midline near the floor of the fourth ventricle until the closure of the open medulla where it becomes internalized near the central canal remnant. This position leaves the DLF in ideal position to innervate the periaqueductal gray, the parabrachial nucleus, the mesencephalic raphe nuclei, and the locus ceruleus rostrally and the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus, the nucleus ambiguous and the medullary raphe more caudally. The centralized location of the DLF as it continues into the lower medulla and then the spinal cord renders it in perfect location to innervate the parasympathetic and sympathetic neurons of the intermediolateral spinal cord. As detailed above the DLF projections are bilateral, though with an ipsilateral dominance, due to several points of decussation. Afferent inputs from the periaqueductal gray, parabrachial nucleus, and the locus ceruleus ascend through the DLF to the hypothalamus.

The medial forebrain bundle (MFB) is the primary route for input to the hypothalamus from the septal nuclei and basal forebrain limbic structures. Inputs from the amygdala and hippocampus, though first arriving to the hypothalamus by way of the stria terminalis, ventral amygdalofugal pathway, and fornix, ultimately join with the MFB and thereby gain access to the paraventricular nucleus. The MFB also has fibers from the paraventricular nucleus that descend to innervate essentially the same nuclei as that by the DLF. Visceral afferents from the nucleus of the solitary tract ascend from the brainstem into the hypothalamus by way of the MFB. The MFB, like the DLF has several points of decussation so that there is input to bilateral structures but with an ipsilateral dominance.

The mammillotegmental tract is less prominent than either the DLF or MFB nevertheless, this pathway that originates in the mammillary nucleus sends projections into the mesencephalic and pontine reticular formations that in turn influence the activity of the brainstem autonomic nuclei listed above.

Somatic afferents ascend to the hypothalamus by way of the spinohypothalamic tract.
Autonomic Dysreflexia is a condition observed in about 85 percent of patients following spinal cord injury above C6. Exaggerated autonomic reflexes, especially sudden dramatic increases in blood pressure are provoked by inappropriate stimuli, such as pressure on the bladder.
Riley-Day Syndrome (familial dysautonomia) is an autosomal recessive disorder in Ashkenazi Jews associated with decreased tearing and sensitivity to pain and absent fungiform papillae on the tongue. Episodic abdominal crises and fever are very common as is orthostatic hypotension.
Shy-Drager Syndrome is a progressive degenerative condition of unknown origin affecting cells of the central autonomic network in the brainstem, intermediolateral cell column, locus ceruleus, dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus, and other nuclei including the substantia nigra caudate nucleus, and cerebellum. The presence of Lewy bodies in many of these areas suggests this syndrome may be related to Parkinson’s disease, in which there is also often a high degree of autonomic dysfunction. The hallmark sign is profound orthostatic hypotension without a compensatory increase in heart rate.
Sudden Infant Death Syndrome is thought to be a developmental defect in the central autonomic network of the brainstem involved with respiratory drive. An abrupt increase in facial skin temperature related to the onset of periods of apnea suggest there may be a broader developmental defect of central autonomic control.
Horner’s Syndrome typically results following damage to the dorsolateral pons or medulla and is characterized by a profound disturbance in sympathetic nervous system function. A common cause of this type of lesion is thrombosis of the posterior inferior cerebellar artery or following damage to the white matter of the cervical spinal cord where the hypothalamic-spinal tract descends. The most common signs in Horner’s syndrome are ipsilateral miosis, ptosis, anhidrosis and erythema.
As noted above, the central autonomic network consists of three hierarchically ordered circuits or loops: the short-term brainstem-spinal loops, and the limbic brain-hypothalamic-brainstem-spinal cord loops mediating anticipatory and stress responses, and the intermediate length hypothalamic-brainstem-spinal cord loops mediating longer-term autonomic reflexes. Here we focus on this later loop in its role in thermoregulation. A later chapter will focus on this loop in the regulation of feeding.

The Hypothalamic Basis of Temperature Set-Point. Regulation of core temperature is essential because most of the metabolic processes necessary for life are strongly temperature-dependent. The normal body temperature set-point is primarily determined by the activity of neurons in the medial preoptic and anterior hypothalamic nuclei as well as by neurons in the adjoining medial septal nuclei. Collectively this region is often termed the preoptic anterior hypothalamus (POAH). The second region that also plays a critical, though subservient role to the POAH, in temperature regulation is the posterior hypothalamus.
It was previously mentioned that the hypothalamus is one of the few brain areas where CNS neurons reside that are themselves directly sensitive to physical or chemical variables such as temperature, plasma osmolality, plasma glucose, and various hormones. The POAH has three types of neurons involved in determining the temperature set-point, warm-sensitive neurons, cold-sensitive neurons, and temperature-insensitive neurons, that are defined by changes in discharge rate following local warming or cooling of the POAH. Warm-sensitive neurons comprise about 30% of the neuronal pool in the POAH. These neurons have a firing rate versus temperature as shown in Figure 3.4. Change in temperature below 37 degrees has little effect on discharge rate. However, as temperature rises above 37 degrees the discharge rate of these neurons increases dramatically. Activation of warm-sensitive neurons results in an activation of neurons in the paraventricular nucleus (PVN) and lateral hypothalamus that result in heightened parasympathetic outflow to promote the dissipation of heat. Cold-sensitive neurons which are only about 5% of the cell population in the POAH, but more prevalent in the posterior hypothalamic nucleus, have discharge properties opposite that of warm-sensitive neurons. The cold-sensitive neurons show low rates of discharge at temperatures above 37 degrees, but increase firing rate steeply as temperature is lowered below 37 degrees. Increased discharges in cold-sensitive neurons results in activation of neurons in the PVN and the posterior hypothalamus that increase sympathetic outflow to promote the generation and conservation of heat. The relative concentration of warm-sensitive neurons in the POAH that promote heat loss and of cold-sensitive neurons in the posterior hypothalamus that promote heat generation has resulted in the POAH often being termed as the heat dissipation center and the posterior hypothalamus being labeled as the heat generation/conservation center. The final group of neurons found in the POAH and posterior hypothalamus is the temperature-insensitive neurons. These are by-far the most numerous of the neurons in these nuclei, comprising greater than 60 percent of those in the POAH. Although by definition not sensitive to changes in temperature these neurons play a crucial role in heat generation/conservation as discussed below.
The master circuit in regulation of body temperature is heat dissipation. The warm-sensitive neurons of the POAH have intrinsic membrane receptors that are sensitive to changes in brain and blood temperature above 37 degrees. These are non-specific cation channels that very likely are related to the vanilloid (capsaicin-sensitive) family of thermoreceptors. Warm-sensitive neurons also receive excitatory inputs from cutaneous and spinal thermoreceptors. As illustrated in Figure 3.4, inputs from cutaneous receptors induce a leftward bias in the firing rates of hypothalamic warm-sensitive neurons, so that baseline discharge rate is greatly elevated. Interestingly, though the firing rate of these cells continues to increase with increases in body temperature, the slope of this increase is reduced. Thus, the drive to dissipate heat is actively driven by inputs from thermal receptors. It is not clear that such is the case for heat generation and conservation. Cool-sensitive neurons do not appear to have intrinsic temperature-sensitive receptors. Rather, the increase in discharge observed in cool-sensitive cells with cooling results from the decreases in discharge of the warm-sensitive neurons and subsequent disinhibition so that the cool-sensitive neurons are now driven by tonic inputs from the thermal-insensitive neurons. Thus, the temperature set-point is principally a function of activity in warm-sensitive neurons of the POAH. The short-term effects of output from both warm- and cool-sensitive neurons on body temperature occur as a result of changes in autonomic tone to cutaneous arterioles and so the amount of cutaneous blood flow. Changes in sympathetic outflow to sweat glands and adipose tissue provide additional targets used for heat dissipation and generation. Longer-term effects of these groups of neurons in response to sustained changes in environmental temperature include the induction of behavioral and neuroendocrine responses to changes in environmental temperature.
Fever. The statement above highlights well the fact that fever has been a scourge battled by physicians since antiquity. However, recently fever has become recognized as in fact only one in a constellation of physiological adaptations that take place during infection referred to as the “sickness” or “acute phase response”. The sickness response includes behavioral, cognitive, metabolic, and neuroendocrine adaptations that are all geared to make the body less hospitable to pathogens and most primed for optimizing immunological defenses. Thus, fever is initiated because most bacteria proliferate poorly at temperatures above 39 degrees, whereas the function of lymphoid cells is optimal at this temperature. Fever is initiated during infection following the activation of macrophages and the subsequent synthesis and release of endogenous pyrogenic substances including interleukin-1 (IL-1), tumor necrosis factor (TNF), interleukin-6 (IL-6), and the interferons (IFN). These pyrogens enter the blood stream and exert their effects in the CNS at the organum vasculosum of the lamina terminalis (OVLT). As discussed in the previous section, the OVLT is one of several sites in the CNS where the blood brain barrier is relatively permeable and so allows the brain to “taste” the internal milieu of the body. The endothelial cells of the OVLT have receptors for the endogenous pyrogens that when activated cause both the synthesis and release into the CNS of prostanoids, in particular, prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) as well as the synthesis and release within the CNS of IL-1, IL-6, TNF, and IFN. PGE2 gains access to the warm-sensitive cells of the POAH immediately adjacent to the OVLT where it binds to surface receptors and induces increases in cellular levels of cyclic AMP. The increased cAMP activates the protein kinase A system resulting in reduced excitability of the warm-sensitive neurons and lowering of their discharge rate. This allows the discharge rate of the cool-sensitive neurons to increase thus, establishing a new, higher temperature set-point. The use of antipyretics such as aspirin and indomethacin counteracts fever by interrupting the synthesis of PGE2 through antagonism of the cyclooxygenase enzyme system in the endothelium of the OVLT.
Heat Exhaustion. Prolonged exposure or over-exertion in very warm environments can result in an excessive loss of fluids and electrolytes resulting in muscle cramps, dizziness, vomiting and fainting. In extreme conditions a degree of hypotension can develop. However, heat exhaustion is distinguished from heat stroke in that the body temperature set-point remains well regulated and the mechanisms mediating heat dissipation are intact. Thus, the skin is cool and moist and body temperature is normal or slightly below normal. Rest and replacement of fluids and electrolytes quickly remedy this condition.

Heat Stroke. If heat exhaustion is not remedied it can progress to heat stroke. Extreme hypotension will result in a drop in cutaneous blood flow and decrease in perspiration. Core temperature will subsequently rise. If this rise is too severe the brain’s normal functioning can be interrupted and control of the temperature set-point fails. This results in further deterioration of the heat dissipation mechanisms and allows core temperature to rise further so that tissue damage ensues which can lead to coma and then death. This heat stroke patient is in a medical emergency and requires urgent lowering of core temperature by fluid and electrolyte replacement. Hepatic damage is common in this condition and jaundice may develop 1 to 2 days after admission. Acute oliguric renal failure may occur. The development of coma and disseminated intravascular coagulation are very poor prognostic factors.

Malignant Hyperthermia is a group of inherited disorders characterized by sudden and extreme increases in core temperature following exposure to gaseous anesthetics including halothane, methoxyflurane, cyclopropane, or ethyl ether; or following exposure to muscle relaxants, particularly succinylcholine. These agents provoke an excessive release of calcium from the muscle sarcoplasmic reticulum resulting in activation of myosin ATPase and so excess heat generation. One form of the disease is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion while a second is inherited in a recessive manner in boys and less often in girls that also have a number of other congenital abnormalities that comprise King’s syndrome. Malignant hyperthermia also sometimes occurs with other myopathies such as myotonia congenita and Duchenne’s muscular dystrophy. Some patients show an elevated creatinine phosphokinase, but most are normal between attacks. Biopsied muscle will show abnormal contraction on exposure to caffeine or gas anesthetic, but this is obviously a clumsy manner to screen for the condition. Careful history of surgical complications in relatives and identification of other contributing conditions is the best way to detect and prevent malignant hyperthermia. Occurrence is a medical emergency and requires immediate institution of the treatment protocol prescribed by the American Society of Anesthesiologists. The surgery and gas anesthetic is stopped, all tubing from the anesthetic devices are changed, and external cooling is initiated. One hundred percent oxygen, 1-2mg/kg sodium bicarbonate, and 1mg/kg dantrolene sodium are given. Drugs for cardiac arrhythmias are given as needed.
Hypothermia is defined as a core temperature of 35 degrees or lower and represents a potential medical emergency. Accidental hypothermia is common in winter following prolonged exposure, not necessarily to excessively low temperatures, and may accompany sepsis, hypothyroidism, pituitary or adrenal insufficiency, hypoglycemia, myocardial infarction and the ingestion of drugs - particularly alcohol. However, hypothermia can also occur in certain medical conditions without exposure, including congestive heart failure, uremia, drug overdose, acute respiratory failure, and hypoglycemia. Most of these patients are elderly. Patients presenting with a core temperature of less than 26.7 degrees are usually unconscious, miotic, bradypneic, bradycardic, and hypotensive with generalized edema. At core temperatures below 25 degrees patients are in coma, areflexic and may appear in rigor mortis. Treatment requires establishing an airway and providing oxygen. Blood volume can be expanded with warmed glucose while the blood gases and cardiac rhythm are carefully monitored. External warming is applied to the thorax only so that the limbs remain vasoconstricted to prevent a precipitous drop in blood pressure.
Several forebrain, diencephalic and brainstem structures are interconnected to organize the output of the autonomic nervous system. Collectively, this is referred to as the central autonomic network and is further organized into a hierarchy of functional loops.

The hypothalamus is the key brain site for central control of the autonomic nervous system, and the paraventricular nucleus is the key hypothalamic site for this control. The major pathway from the hypothalamus for autonomic control is the dorsal longitudinal fasciculus.

Regulation of body temperature is one example of hypothalamic control of brainstem and spinal autonomic nuclei related to longer-term autonomic reflexes. Thermoregulation is principally a function of warm-sensitive neurons of the preoptic anterior hypothalamus that directly control the dissipation of heat.

Fever is the most common disorder of thermoregulation. Fever is following the release of endogenous pyrogens that elevate the level of prostaglandin E2 in the preoptic anterior hypothalamus, which causes a decrease in activity of warm-sensitive neurons and subsequent disinhibition of cool-sensitive neurons.
Feeding by its nature is intermittent, yet the need for energy in tissues is constant. Thus, mechanisms have evolved for the ebb and flow of nutrients after feeding and during the post-absorptive period; and the maintenance of near-normal function during fasting. The remarkable stability of body weight in persons with access to adequate food supplies is testament to the precision by which metabolic needs are monitored and maintained. Aberrations in these controls can produce serious and even life-threatening conditions.
Two major hypotheses have been put forward to account for the process by which the usual balance in caloric intake is established.
The Depletion-repletion Hypothesis. The depletion-repletion hypothesis is essentially based on the idea of a caloric set-point. In its simplest version individuals match energy expenditure and energy intake without reference to the level of fat storage. In more complicated models fat (energy) depots, and presumably other nutrient depots, send signals to the brain about their current status. These inputs are compared to desired set points and food intake and energy expenditure are modified to effect adjustments to the levels of stores. The best evidence for this view is from small mammals. Glucose-responsive neurons that increase firing rate with glucose levels and glucose-sensitive neurons that are stimulated as glucose levels fall have been identified. Further, small mammals will habitually return to a body mass that is appropriate for their age, stage of development and/or environment after a forced perturbation. Thus, rats exposed to a period of food restriction or imposed overfeeding (gavage) express a compensatory hyper- or hypophagia on return to ad libitum feeding. The current studies on leptin (see below) has heightened interest in this potential mechanism.

The Primed Response Hypothesis. This hypothesis essentially boils down to the idea that animals will eat whenever an opportunity presents itself unless it is specifically inhibited. Evidence in support of this idea comes from studies examining the relationship between caloric content in meals and feeding intervals. There is not a correlation between the amount eaten in a meal and the interval to the previous meal. Rather, the larger a given meal, the longer it will be to the next. This suggests that eating is inhibited by satiety signals generated in response to a meal.
There are two main issues in the concept of satiety. The first concerns the mechanisms that contribute to the termination of feeding at a given meal, whereas the second concerns the mechanisms that govern interprandial intervals. These mechanisms overlap to a degree.

Neural Signals are essentially dependent on the vagus and involve both afferent and efferent components. The afferent signals in the vagus conveyed to the brain that function to limit meal size include information from stretch receptors in the stomach wall, and sensors in the portal blood vessels for cholecystokinin (CCK), glucose, osmolality and pH. All these stimuli limit meal size. Vagal afferents synapse in the nucleus of the solitary tract. In addition, the vagus sends afferents to the area postrema. These sites send projections to the paraventricular nucleus to inhibit feeding. The vagus also functions in an afferent capacity in that input from the vagus to the pancreas mediates the cephalic phase of insulin release. The sight and smell of food initiates activity in limbic cortex that in turn activates the central autonomic network. Outflow to the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus and finally to the pancreas results in the first surge of insulin in the blood that accompanies a meal. Two additional increases in plasma insulin later occur as food enters the gut (the gastrointestinal phase) and then as nutrients enter the intestines (the substrate phase). In fact, these stimuli also result in satiety as insulin not only promotes energy storage but also acts as a humoral signal back to the brain for satiety.

Humoral Signals for satiety are an extremely hot topic of research due to the vast potential weight-control market. The main factors in the blood that affect the CNS to limit/promote feeding are insulin, leptin, glucose, and CCK. Insulin, leptin and glucose gain access to the CNS at the circumventricular organs of the median eminence and the area postrema and act on specific receptors in neurons of the nuclear cell groups adjoining these areas. Insulin and leptin have received considerable recent interest as the mediators of satiety signals related to the caloric content of a meal and in relation to maintenance of a body weight set point, respectively. Chief among the CNS sites of action for these compounds as discussed below is the arcuate nucleus. CCK exerts its chief effects on satiety in the periphery by an action on the vagus to potentiate the responses to glucose, pH, and osmolality in the portal blood. CCK derived from neurons in the hypothalamus is also a transmitter substance in the CNS satiety network (see below).
The Dual Center Hypothesis evolved about fifty years ago when it was demonstrated that bilateral lesions placed in the region of the ventromedial hypothalamus (VMH) produced a condition of voracious appetite and resulting marked hyperphagia. These animals would ultimately become remarkably obese. On the other hand, bilateral lesions of the ventrolateral hypothalamus (VLH) produced an anorexic condition that resulted in animals failing to feed and ultimately wasting. The assumption behind this set of experiments was that there are specific feeding and satiety centers. The conclusion in this set of experiments was that the feeding center was the VLH and the satiety center was the VMH. Although this dual center hypothesis has proven useful, the CNS satiety network has proven to be more complex. More recent repetitions of the earlier lesion studies showed that in fact animals with VMH lesions would not eat continually without limit, nor would the animals with VLH lesions necessarily starve to death. Rather, the VMH lesioned animals would eat excessively until they reached some new higher body weight at which point they would then reduce their food consumption to maintain this new set point. Likewise, once the VLH lesioned animals had dropped to some new level, they would again eat normally to maintain the new lower body weight set-point. These studies indicate that satiety and feeding is a balancing process between two major groups of neurochemical pathways that ultimately govern the relative tone between the sympathetic and parasympathetic components of the central autonomic network. The main entry points for information to this network are both neural and humoral. The neural inputs are from the vagus nerve via synapses in the nucleus of the solitary tract and the area postrema as well as inputs from the raphe nuclei. These inputs ascend in the medial forebrain bundle to the paraventricular and the lateral hypothalamic area (LHA). The humoral inputs pass the circumventricular organs and affect the area postrema and the arcuate nucleus. The arcuate nucleus projects into the LHA and the ventromedial nucleus as well as to the paraventricular and dorsomedial (DM) nucleus. The paraventricular nucleus returns inputs to the arcuate nucleus as well as to the VMH and LHA. There are no direct interconnections between the VMH and LHA, rather these are processed through the DM.
Neurochemistry. Several peptides are involved in hypothalamic regulation of feeding and body mass. These can be sorted based on their behavioral effects into anabolic/orexigenic peptides that promote feeding and increase of body mass or as catabolic/anorexigenic peptides. Each set of peptides includes what appears to be a key signal molecule that promotes either feeding or satiety as well as an antagonist of the opposing stimulus.
nabolic/orexigenic peptides include neuropeptide Y (NPY), agouti-related protein (AGRP), melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH), orexin, and galanin. NPY is the key feeding-promoting neuropeptide and NPY receptor subtype 5 is the key site of action. NPY increases in the arcuate nucleus within 6 hours of food deprivation. Of note the neurons that express NPY in rodents also express receptors for leptin and insulin and so are yoked to plasma-derived feeding signals. AGRP is an antagonist for the anorexigenic peptides as it blocks the MC3 and 4 receptors for γ- and α-melanocyte-stimulating hormones, respectively.
Catabolic/anorexigenic peptides include a-melanocyte stimulating hormone (a-MSH), cocaine- and amphetamine-regulated transcript (CART), glucagon-like peptides 1 and 2 (GLP-1, GLP-2) and prolactin-releasing peptide (PrlRP). These peptides fall with food deprivation and conversely rise with forced overfeeding. For example, corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) increases in the paraventricular nucleus (PVN) and pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) increases in the arcuate nucleus with overfeeding. The key anorexigenic signals are α- and less so γ-MSH acting at the MC4 and MC3 receptors, respectively. The antagonist in this group for the orexigenic peptide NPY is CART.
Obesity is characterized by an excess of adipose tissue, however, the exact definition of “excess” is somewhat enigmatic. The simplest way to define “excess” is that amount of adipose tissue that creates a health risk. The best index at present is that this represents an amount of adipose tissue that puts an individual 20% or greater above their ideal body weight. Using these criteria somewhere between 20 and 40 percent of adults are obese with these rates over-representative by minorities and the poor. Excess intake of calories is the usual major contributor to obesity. Basal metabolic rate in a 70kg man is about 1500 calories/day, so anything above this in a sedentary, healthy individual will result in weight gain. Another mechanism besides excess caloric intake that may contribute to obesity is the lipoprotein lipase hypothesis in which an excess of adipose tissue lipoprotein lipase preferentially stores lipid calories as adipose tissue. Obesity has several important metabolic sequela that can contribute to additional medical problems.

Hyperinsulinemia with hyper- or euglycemia. Insulin resistance may develop due to an abnormal beta cell product, circulating antibodies or tissue insulin insensitivity. Insulin insensitivity results due to a combination of receptor and post-receptor defects in insulin action.
Hyperlipoproteinemia. Obesity is characterized by elevated VLDL and elevated serum triglyceride and an increase in serum free fatty acid turnover.
Hypertension, Hypoventilation (Pickwickian Syndrome) are often observed in the obese patient. Other endocrine disorders may also develop.
Froehlich’s Syndrome is characterized by obesity, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and other variable features including diabetes insipidus, visual impairment and mental retardation. It is thought to result due to a hypothalamic lesion.

Anorexia Nervosa is a disorder almost exclusively seen in young, white women of middle-class background, with a prevalence of as high as 1 per 100 being reported. Subclinical prevalence may be as high as 5 percent. Diagnosis is made on a clinical basis as there is no diagnostic test. Patients observed to be below about 80% of ideal body weight are suspect when no other medical (psychological) causes can be identified. A disordered attitude toward eating, food or weight that overrides hunger, ritualized exercise, amenorrhea, bradycardia, hypotension, and hypothermia complete the usual clinical picture. Patients with anorexia are vulnerable to sudden death from ventricular tachyarrhythmias. There is no specific treatment as yet because the underlying mechanisms are not defined. However, a recent study has shown that a significant number of these patients and those with bulimia have plasma antibodies against pituitary and hypothalamic melanotropes and/or corticotropes suggesting an underlying autoimmune disorder.

Bulimia is often considered a disorder related to anorexia nervosa. The disorder is characterized by the episodic ingestion of large amounts of food in a compulsive fashion (“ox-hunger”) coupled with the awareness that the eating pattern is abnormal, that it cannot be stopped, and depression at completion of the act. There is usually a morbid fear of becoming fat, although body weight is usually in the normal range. Induced vomiting that eventually becomes reflexive usually follows episodes of binge eating. Patients frequently have additional behavioral/psychiatric abnormalities.
Caloric homeostasis is maintained by a body weight set point. This set point is at least in part maintained by a set of signals from peripheral energy stores into the brain that stimulate feeding to maintain adequate stores of nutrients. Feeding also appears to largely occur as a primed response whenever food is available and that continues until inhibitory satiety signals are received in the brain that are derived from a meal.

Cessation of feeding in a given meal and the time to the next meal is determined by neural and humoral signals derived from that meal. The neural signals come from the vagus and include information concerning the size (stretch of stomach) and caloric/nutrient content (portal glucose, plasma insulin, leptin).

The CNS satiety network is a subdivision of the central autonomic network. Thus, it includes the brainstem afferent and efferent relays for the vagus as well as the brainstem sympathetic relays such as nuclear group A2 and the raphe system. The arcuate nucleus and less so the area postrema are key sites for registration of humoral inputs to this network. Integrated activity between the ventromedial, dorsomedial and lateral hypothalamic areas ultimately is integrated at the paraventricular nucleus that determines a net balance between the feeding promoting central parasympathetic circuitry and the satiety-promoting central sympathetic circuitry.
Limbic is a Latin term which means border. Like the familiar word “limbo”, it means an intermediate or transitional state, which is a border. In this case, the border is between the neocortex and the subcortical structures (diencephalon). The limbic system includes the hippocampal formation, amygdala, septal nuclei, cingulate cortex, entorhinal cortex, perirhinal cortex, and parahippocampal cortex. These last three cortical areas comprise different portions of the temporal lobe. (Some experts would also include parts of the hypothalamus, thalamus, midbrain reticular formation, and olfactory areas in the limbic system.)
The term hippocampal formation typically refers to the dentate gyrus, the hippocampus proper (i.e., cornu ammonis), and the subicular cortex. A hippocampal formation is located in the temporal lobe of each cerebral cortex, medial to the inferior horn of the lateral ventricle.
Hippocampus means seahorse in Greek. Each hippocampus looks like a seahorse due to the way it is folded during development.
The hippocampus is also called cornu ammonis. Ammon was an Egyptian god, near whose temple ammonia or the salt of Ammon was prepared. The hippocampus is also called Ammon’s Horn because the two hippocampi bend around in the form of the horns of a ram.
The fornix is a “C” shaped tract (in sagittal section). The fornix begins as the bundle of fibers called the alveus. The alveus is white matter consisting of myelinated afferents and efferents. As the fibers of the alveus travel posteriorly, they aggregate medially to form the fimbria of the fornix. Fimbria means fringe and in this case it is the fringe of the hippocampus. The fimbria looks like a thick rubber band. The fimbria of each hippocampus thickens as it moves posteriorly and eventually splits off from the hippocampus forming the crua or “legs” (singular—crus) of each hippocampus. The two crua come together and form the hippocampal commissure. The hippocampal commissure provides one of two major paths whereby the hippocampi communicate with each other.

After the hippocampal commissure the single fiber bundle is properly referred to as the fornix. The fornix continues in an arc to the anterior commissure.

The anterior commissure is important as a landmark because this is where the fornix splits into three parts and goes to different structures:

The split just before the anterior commissure is called the precommissural fornix and this branch goes to the septal nuclei, the ventral striatum, and the cingulate cortex.
Some fibers from the fornix also pass through the anterior commissure to the contralateral hippocampus. This is the second of the two major paths by which the hippocampi communicate with each other.
The split after the anterior commissure is called the postcommissural fornix and this branch goes to the mammillary bodies of the hypothalamus and the anterior nuclei of the thalamus.
It is important to remember that afferents and efferents of the hippocampus are bundled together in the same paths. Thus, by knowing the output paths, for example, you will also know the input paths, or vice versa.

Two major pathways into and out of the hippocampus are the fornix and entorhinal cortex (via the cingulate cortex). The precommissural branch of the fornix connects to the septal nuclei, preoptic nuclei, ventral striatum, orbital cortex and anterior cingulate cortex. The postcommissural branch of the fornix connects to the anterior nucleus of the thalamus and the mammillary bodies of the hypothalamus. The mammillary bodies are destroyed in Korsakoff’s syndrome as the result of alcoholism and thiamine deficiency. Patients with Korsakoff’s syndrome have profound difficulty forming new memories. Because the mammillothalamic tract also goes to the anterior thalamic nucleus, the hippocampus can affect the thalamus indirectly as well as directly.

The anterior thalamic nuclei in turn connect to the cingulate cortex. The cingulate cortex projects back to the entorhinal cortex of parahippocampal gyrus, completing a “great” loop called the Papez circuit. The Papez circuit like many other areas of the limbic system is involved in learning and memory, emotion, and social behavior, and was originally thought (by James Papez) to the anatomical substrate of emotional experience. The amygdala, along with neocortical areas, are now known to be centrally involved in emotional experience. Its connections to the original Papez circuit are shown in the next figure and the amygdala and emotion are discussed more thoroughly in the next section.
The hippocampus has direct connections to the entorhinal cortex (via the subiculum) and the amygdala. These structures connect to many other areas of the brain. The entorhinal cortex projects to the cingulate cortex. Therefore, the hippocampus can affect the cingulate cortex through the anterior thalamic nucleus or the entorhinal cortex. The cingulate cortex, in turn, projects to the temporal lobe cortex, orbital cortex, and olfactory bulb. Thus, all of these areas can be influenced by the hippocampus.
The input paths are just the reverse of the output paths. The entorhinal cortex is a major source of inputs to the hippocampus. In addition, the cingulate cortex, temporal lobe cortex, amygdala, orbital cortex, and olfactory bulb all have inputs to the hippocampus via the entorhinal cortex.

The hippocampus receives inputs via the precommissural branch of the fornix from the nucleus basalis of Meynert, which is a portion of the substantia innominata and which in turn is a portion of the septal nuclei. Also the hippocampus receives inputs via the postcommissural branch of the fornix inputs from the mammillary bodies of the hypothalamus.
The hippocampus proper and the dentate gyrus processes information that passes through the hippocampus. These two structures, the hippocampus proper and the dentate gyrus, form two interlocking “Cs.” The term dentate gyrus comes from the beaded or toothed appearance of this structure resulting from the many small blood vessels from subarachnoid space that penetrate the dentate gyrus. The hippocampus and dentate gyrus are actually cortex, but it is 3-layered cortex rather than 6-layered cortex as in the neocortex. Because of the smaller number of layers and their location between the neocortex and diencephalon, these cortices have been called paleocortex, which means old cortex or archicortex which means ancient cortex. These terms are misleading because they give the false impression that these cortices are antiquated remnants left over as the brain evolved and became more complex. They are brain regions that have actually continued to develop structurally and functionally throughout phylogeny.

The hippocampus and dentate gyrus, like the neocortex, have a superficial molecular layer and a deep polymorphic layer. But because these structures are "inside-out" cortex, the molecular layer is on the inside and the polymorphic layer is on the outside. The middle layer of the hippocampus proper is a pyramidal cell layer. The middle layer of the dentate gyrus is a granular layer. The molecular layer of the hippocampus proper faces the dentate gyrus. The area of the hippocampus proper that is capped by the dentate gyrus is referred to as CA3 (CA for cornu ammonis).

The polymorphic layer is the alveus and is equivalent to the white matter of the neocortex. The subiculum is the transition layer from the hippocampus to the parahippocampal gyrus and changes gradually from three to six layers.

The hippocampus coordinates information from a variety of sources. A major flow of information through the hippocampus is a one-way circuit. Some inputs to the hippocampus (perforant pathway) from the entorhinal cortex pass through to the dentate gyrus. From the dentate gyrus connections are made to CA3 of the hippocampus proper via mossy fibers and to CA1 via Schaffer collaterals. From these two CA fields information then passes through the subiculum entering the alveus, fimbria, and fornix and then to other areas of the brain.
Information flows into and through the hippocampus by three principal pathways: 1. the perforant pathway from the entorhinal cortex to granule cells of the dentate gyrus; 2. the mossy fiber pathway from the granule cell of the dentate gyrus to the pyramidal cells of the CA3 region of the hippocampus; and 3. the Schaffer collateral pathway from the CA3 region of the hippocampus to the CA1 region of the hippocampus.
Identification of an epileptic seizure can be made through EEG (Electroencephalogram) recordings. The EEG records from hundreds of thousands of neurons from scalp electrodes. A few electrodes are placed on the scalp. Voltage differences are recorded relative to a reference electrode some distance from the site.

The pyramidal cells of the middle layer of the hippocampus proper are the major input of the EEG recording. The pyramidal cells have specialized structures for input called dendritic spines, little spines that are attached to the dendritic shafts. The pyramidal cells are glutamate excitatory neurons and are the major neurons that project to the cerebral cortex and are the major driving force of temporal lobe epilepsy.
The dendrites are parallel to one another resulting in summation of extracellular current flow and hyper-excitability seen in epilepsy.
The pyramidal dendrites are perpendicular to the cortical surface resulting in different layers of cortex impinging at different points along the dendritic tree.
The pyramidal dendrites contain dendritic spines that amplify currents (inputs) so that distant synaptic sites can more easily generate action potentials.
The pyramidal cells (dendrites) receive inputs from basket cells that regulate excitability of the pyramidal cells through recurrent inhibition.
Pyramidal cells would be in a continuous bursting firing mode if there were no basket cells. The diagram shows a cartoon pyramidal cell, axon, excitatory collateral to basket cell, basket cell, and inhibitory connection to pyramidal cell. This simple circuit is what is called recurrent inhibition. This is a general feature of nervous system, a collateral to a special cell—the basket cell. The pyramidal cell excites the basket cell. Excitation of the basket cell in turn produces negative feedback or inhibition of the pyramidal cell. That is, action of the pyramidal cell acts through the basket cell to regulate its own activity. The neurotransmitter of the basket cell is GABA or gamma-aminobutyric acid, typical of most inhibitory neurons.

Epilepsy is a synchronous discharge of pyramidal cells. This synchronous discharge produces stereotyped and involuntary jerking movements, loss of awareness, and in the most extreme case convulsions and loss of consciousness. Next to stroke, epilepsy is the most common neurological disease. Possibly as much as 1% of the population is affected at one time or the other.

Focal or partial epilepsy is restricted to a particular brain region. But an epileptic attack can begin as a focal attack and spread to other cortical areas and become a generalized seizure.

For an epileptic seizure hundreds of thousands of neurons must be firing in synchrony. The way this happens is a breakdown in postsynaptic inhibition. The importance of inhibition and the role of the basket cell can be demonstrated by disabling the connection between the basket cell and the pyramidal cell.

Picrotoxin, a GABA antagonist, will disable this junction and results in a cascade of excitation and the synchronous activity of an epileptic seizure.

Also, examination of sections through the hippocampus in patients with temporal lobe epilepsy has shown a loss of cells in the plexus surrounding pyramidal cells. This is where the basket cells are typically found. Thus, there is a loss of the inhibitory input that is normally found there. The brake on the system, that is control of the burst firing of pyramidal cells, has been removed when the basket cells have been removed.
Long-term potentiation (or LTP) was discovered by efforts to determine how the hippocampus might determine memory. Patient H.M. had just recently demonstrated that the hippocampus was critical in lying down new memories. Researchers found that neural activity can modify synaptic strength in certain areas of the hippocampus. This modified synaptic strength (LTP) may be a storage mechanism for memory.  For more information on LTP and how it is involved in memory formation, see the chapter on Learning and Memory.
Amygdala is the integrative center for emotions, emotional behavior, and motivation. If the brain is turned upside down the end of the structure continuous with the hippocampus is called the uncus. If you peel away uncus you will expose the amygdala which abuts the anterior of the hippocampus. Just like with the hippocampus, major pathways communicate bidirectionally and contain both efferent and afferent fibers.
As was the case with the hippocampus, fibers carrying inputs to the amygdala are in virtually all cases combined with fibers carrying outputs from the amygdala.

The amygdala receives inputs from all senses as well as visceral inputs. Since the amygdala is very important in emotional learning it is not surprising that visceral inputs are a major input source. Visceral inputs come from the hypothalamus, septal area, orbital cortex, and parabrachial nucleus. Olfactory sensory information comes from the olfactory bulb. Auditory, visual and somatosensory information comes from the temporal and anterior cingulate cortices.
Ventral Amygdalofugal Pathway. The term "fugal" comes from the word fuge—to drive away—as in fugitive. This pathway continues to the anterior olfactory nucleus, anterior perforated substance, piriform cortex, orbitofrontal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, and ventral striatum. The ventral striatum includes part of the caudate, putamen, and the nucleus accumbens septi (nucleus that reclines on the septum). Projections from the ventral striatum are links in a basal ganglia circuit that are important in stimulus-response associative learning. The ventral amygdalofugal pathway also connects to the hypothalamus and septal nucleus, but the amygdala's major connection to the hypothalamus and septal nucleus is through the stria terminalis.

The ventral amygdalofugal pathway is important because it is a link whereby motivation and drives, through the limbic system, can influence responses. It is also a link whereby responses are learned. In this case this is the link whereby associative learning takes place. That is where responses are associated with appetitive and aversive consequences that is rewards and punishers.

Three simplifications:

The stria terminalis is similar in form, function, and location as the fornix for the hippocampal pathway. Thus by way of analogy one can say that the stria terminalis is to the amygdala as the fornix is to the hippocampus. Stria is a Latin word that means line, groove, or band. Related to the word "striated".
The stria terminalis connects only to subcortical structures. (Connection to cortical structures is through the ventral amygdalofugal pathway.)
The stria terminalis overlaps with the ventral amygdalofugal pathway in that it also connects to the septal nuclei and hypothalamus and thus forms a loop.
More on similarities to the fornix:

Like the fornix, the stria terminalis has precommissural and postcommissural branches in relation to the anterior commissure. The precommissural branch goes to the septal area. This is exactly what the fornix does. The postcommissural branch goes to the hypothalamus. This is exactly what the fornix does. Whereas the postcommissural branch of the fornix projects to mammillary bodies of the hypothalamus, the postcommissural branch of the stria terminalis projects to the lateral nucleus and ventral-medial nucleus of the hypothalamus.

As with the fornix, some fibers enter anterior commissure cross to the contralateral side. Just as in the case of the two hippocampi communicating with each other through the anterior commissure, the two amygdala communicate with each other through the anterior commissure.

The stria terminalis also projects to the habenula, which is part of the epithalamus.
The central nucleus of the amygdala produces autonomic components of emotion (e.g., changes in heart rate, blood pressure, and respiration) primarily through output pathways to the lateral hypothalamus and brain stem.

The central nucleus of the amygdala also produces conscious perception of emotion primarily through the ventral amygdalofugal output pathway to the anterior cingulate cortex, orbitofrontal cortex, and prefrontal cortex.
Stimulation of the amygdala causes intense emotion, such as aggression or fear.

Irritative lesions of temporal lobe epilepsy have the effect of stimulating the amygdala. In its extreme form irritative lesions of temporal lobe epilepsy can cause a panic attack. Panic attacks are brief spontaneously recurrent episodes of terror that generate a sense of impending disaster without a clearly identifiable cause. PET scans have shown an increase in blood flow to the parahippocampal gyri, beginning with the right parahippocampal gyrus. Similar but attenuated blood flow increases occurs during anxiety attacks.

Destructive lesions such as ablation of the amygdala cause an effect opposite to the irritative lesions of temporal lobe epilepsy. Destructive lesions of the amygdala cause tameness in animals, and a placid calmness in humans characterized as a flatness of affect. Lesions of the amygdala can occur as a result of Urbach-Wiethe disease where calcium is deposited in the amygdala. If this disease occurs early in life then these patients with bilateral amygdala lesions cannot discriminate emotion in facial expressions, but their ability to identify faces remains. The anatomical area for face recognition and memory is in the multimodal association area of the inferotemporal cortex. This is a good example of how emotion in one area (amygdala) is linked with perception in another area (inferotemporal cortex) to create an intense emotionally charged memory.
Flatness of affect is one of the symptoms of the previously mentioned Kluver-Bucy syndrome where the entire temporal lobes of monkeys were removed. Actually,just lesions of the amygdala were shown to be primarily responsible for flatness of affect. This work eventually led to the psychosurgical technique of prefrontal lobotomies. Remember the movie with Jack Nicholson, “One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest.” The prefrontal cortex inputs into the amygdala. By severing this input a flatness of affect is produced which was thought to be desirable in schizophrenic patients who were aggressively violent or emotionally agitated.

The amygdala combines many different sensory inputs. Like the hippocampus it combines external and internal stimuli. Every sensory modality has input. These are integrated with somatosensory and visceral inputs—this is where you get your “gut reaction”. The link between prefrontal cortex, septal area, hypothalamus, and amygdala likely gives us our gut feelings, those subjective feelings, about what is good and what is bad.

It is also where memory and emotions are combined. When the reward is particularly sweet, that behavior and association may last a lifetime. Likewise, the trauma and humiliation of punishment may be remembered for a long time too.
Another example of emotion being linked to some perceptual experience is fear conditioning. In this example the sensory experience is auditory rather than visual as in the emotion of faces. Much of what we know about the amygdala and its role in emotional learning and memory comes from fear conditioning, mostly but not exclusively conducted with animals. This is an example of classical conditioning or Pavlovian conditioning. In the classic experiments conducted by Pavlov just after the turn of the century, a neutral stimulus—a bell—was sounded and after a brief interval food powder—the unconditioned stimulus—was placed in the dog’s mouth. After a few such pairings the dog would salivate to the sound of the bell. The crucial aspect of classical conditioning is that it is a pairing between two stimuli. No response is required to get the reward. In fear conditioning, an organism hears a noise or sees a visual stimulus. A few seconds, later it receives a mild shock. The reactions involve freezing, elevated blood pressure and heart rate, and it gets twitchy—startles easily.
Pathways from the thalamus to the amygdala are particularly important in emotional learning. Output pathways from the central nucleus of the amygdala make extensive connections with the brain stem for emotional responses and extensive connections with cortical areas through the nucleus basalis. Cholinergic projections from the nucleus basalis to the cortex are thought to arouse the cortex.

The following diagram provides additional information on outputs controlled by the amygdala during fear conditioning.
Some pathways of fear conditioning have been discovered and this is a hot research topic in neuroscience. If the auditory cortex pathway is lesioned, for example, basic fear conditioning is unaltered, but discrimination is altered. In the discrimination procedure one sound is paired with shock and another sound is not paired with shock. The animals had to rely solely on the thalamus and amygdala for learning and they could not learn the discrimination; apparently the two stimuli were indistinguishable.

So, the cortex is not needed for simple fear conditioning; instead it allows us to recognize an object by sight or sound— to interpret the environment.

Thus, pathways from the sensory thalamus provide only a crude perception of the world, but because they involve only one neural link they are fast pathways. Why might FAST be important? We need a quick reaction to potential danger. The thalamus—amygdala pathway provides us with this and may also prepare the amygdala to receive more highly processed information from the cortex.

On the other hand, pathways from the cortex offer detailed and accurate representations of the environment. Because these pathways have multiple neural links they are slow by comparison.

If for example we see a slender curled shape behind a tree its much better to jump back and later recognize its a garden hose than to fail to quickly jump back if it were a snake. There is plenty of time later to reflect that it was foolish to be startled in our own secure garden where there are no snakes.
Fear producing visual stimuli is quickly processed by the thalamus and this information is passed to the amygdala (red) producing a quick response (green) to danger. The thalamus also passes the information to the cortex so that more careful (and slower) judgments can be made about the real potential danger.

The amygdala is involved in pleasureful emotional learning as well as fearful emotional learning. Consider instrumental learning. Unlike classical conditioning where two stimuli are paired, in instrumental conditioning responses are followed by reward and stimulus-response associations are learned. There are thus three events: a stimulus, a response, and a reward. It has become clear that all three pairwise combinations are learned in instrumental conditioning. Where the amygdala comes in is that lesions of the basolateral nuclei of the amygdala disrupt the association the stimulus and rewarding attributes of the food.

This amygdala memory system serves as an example of memory systems generally. The establishment of memories is a function of the entire network, not any single component. The amygdala is involved in a kind of primitive emotional memory, one that is likely preserved by evolution. According to the diagram of memory systems (e.g., Nolte, p.577), declarative memory is mediated by the hippocampus and the cortex. But like the cortex, lesions of the hippocampus have little effect on fear conditioning except in discriminating environmental stimuli.

A study of patients with damage to the amygdala, hippocampus, or both clearly demonstrates the distinctive roles of these two structures in memory. These patients were shown slides of green, blue, yellow, or red colors. After some colors, a loud and frightening horn blast was sounded. Autonomic responses were recorded (via GSR recordings) to determine learning. Amygdala patients did not become conditioned to colors followed by the loud horn. But when asked how many colors were presented and which were followed by the horn, their recall was correct. That is, they had explicit memory about the events. On the other hand, hippocampal patients showed learning and conditioning to the colors followed by the horn, but could not recall which they were. That is, they had implicit memory about the events. Patients with both types of lesions showed no conditioning and had no explicit memory about which colors were followed by the horn. The chapter on Learning and Memory will explain more about explicit memory and the hippocampus.
Fear producing visual stimuli is quickly processed by the thalamus and this information is passed to the amygdala (red) producing a quick response (green) to danger. The thalamus also passes the information to the cortex so that more careful (and slower) judgments can be made about the real potential danger.

The amygdala is involved in pleasureful emotional learning as well as fearful emotional learning. Consider instrumental learning. Unlike classical conditioning where two stimuli are paired, in instrumental conditioning responses are followed by reward and stimulus-response associations are learned. There are thus three events: a stimulus, a response, and a reward. It has become clear that all three pairwise combinations are learned in instrumental conditioning. Where the amygdala comes in is that lesions of the basolateral nuclei of the amygdala disrupt the association the stimulus and rewarding attributes of the food.

This amygdala memory system serves as an example of memory systems generally. The establishment of memories is a function of the entire network, not any single component. The amygdala is involved in a kind of primitive emotional memory, one that is likely preserved by evolution. According to the diagram of memory systems (e.g., Nolte, p.577), declarative memory is mediated by the hippocampus and the cortex. But like the cortex, lesions of the hippocampus have little effect on fear conditioning except in discriminating environmental stimuli.

A study of patients with damage to the amygdala, hippocampus, or both clearly demonstrates the distinctive roles of these two structures in memory. These patients were shown slides of green, blue, yellow, or red colors. After some colors, a loud and frightening horn blast was sounded. Autonomic responses were recorded (via GSR recordings) to determine learning. Amygdala patients did not become conditioned to colors followed by the loud horn. But when asked how many colors were presented and which were followed by the horn, their recall was correct. That is, they had explicit memory about the events. On the other hand, hippocampal patients showed learning and conditioning to the colors followed by the horn, but could not recall which they were. That is, they had implicit memory about the events. Patients with both types of lesions showed no conditioning and had no explicit memory about which colors were followed by the horn. The chapter on Learning and Memory will explain more about explicit memory and the hippocampus.
Psychologists and neuroscientists have divided memory systems into two broad categories, declarative and nondeclarative (Figure 7.1).  The declarative memory system is the system of memory that is perhaps the most familiar.  It is the memory system that has a conscious component and it includes the memories of facts and events.  A fact like 'Paris is the capital of France', or an event like a prior vacation to Paris.  Nondeclarative memory, also called implicit memory, includes the types of memory systems that do not have a conscious component but are nevertheless extremely important.  They include the memories for skills and habits (e.g., riding a bicycle, driving a car, playing golf or tennis or a piano), a phenomenon called priming, simple forms of associative learning [e.g., classical conditioning (Pavlovian conditioning)], and finally simple forms of nonassociative learning such as habituation and sensitization.  Sensitization will be discussed in detail later in the Chapter.  Declarative memory is "knowing what" and nondeclarative memory is "knowing how".
Everyone is interested in knowing how well they remember so let us take a simple memory test.  The test (Figure 7.2) will present a list of 15 words, then there will be a pause and you will be asked whether you remember some of those words.  Sorry, you have to put your pen down for this test and do not read further in the Chapter until you complete the test.

This memory test called the DRM test after its creators James Deese, Henry Roediger and Kathleen McDermott.  It was not meant to be a trick, but to illustrate a very interesting and important feature about memory.  We like to think that memory is similar to taking a photograph and placing that photograph into a filing cabinet drawer to be withdrawn later (recalled) as the “memory” exactly the way it was placed there originally (stored).  But memory is more like taking a picture and tearing it up into small pieces and putting the pieces in different drawers.  The memory is then recalled by reconstructing the memory from the individual fragments of the memory.  The reason so many individuals incorrectly believe that “sweet” was on the list is because there were so many other words on the list that had a sweet connotation.  “Failing” this test is actually not a bad outcome. Individuals with Alzheimer’s disease generally do not say that “sweet” was on the list.  They cannot make the normal associations involved in the recall of a memory.

The word list gives insights into memory processing and retrieval, but it is not a really good test of “raw” memory ability because it can be affected by distortions and biases.  To avoid these problems, psychologists have developed other memory tests.  One is the object recognition test (Figure 7.3) to test declarative memory.  This test is also good because, as we will see later, it can even be used on animals.  The test involves presenting a subject with two different objects and they are asked to remember those objects.  There is a pause and then two objects are shown again, one of which is new and the other having been shown previously.  Subjects are asked to identify the novel object, and to do so, they need to remember which one was shown previously.  A somewhat related test is the object location test in which subjects are asked to remember the location of an object on a two-dimensional surface.

Examples of nondeclarative memory, such as associative learning, can be tested by pairing one stimulus with another and later testing whether a subject has learned to make the association between the two stimuli. The classical example is the paradigm developed by the Russian physiologist Ivan Pavlov, which is now called classical or Pavlovian conditioning.  In classical conditioning (Figure 7.4), a novel or weak stimulus (conditioned stimulus, CS) like a sound is paired with a stimulus like food that generally elicits a reflexive response (unconditioned response, UR; unconditioned stimulus, US) such as salivation.  After sufficient training with contingent CS-US presentations (which may be a single trial), the CS is capable of eliciting a response (conditioned response, CR), which often resembles the UR (or some aspect of it).
Now let us turn to this issue about where is memory located.  There are three basic approaches.

Imaging.  Modern imaging techniques like fMRI (functional magnetic resonance imaging) or PET (positron emission tomography) allows one to “see” areas of the brain that are active during specific brain tasks.  If a subject is placed in an fMRI scanner and given a memory test, one can determine what areas of the brain are active, and that activity presumably is related to where in the brain the memory is processed and/or stored.
Figure 7,5 illustrates an example of a PET scan of an individual who is performing an object location test.  The color code is such that the brighter, redder regions indicate increased brain activity.  The most active region is the hippocampus.  In discussions of memory, the hippocampus is mentioned repeatedly because it is a major part of the brain involved in declarative memory function.  This illustration clearly indicates that the hippocampus is involved in object location memory.  But as we will see soon, it is not where all memories are stored. 

Brain lesions.  In this experimental procedure, small parts of the brains of mice or rats are surgically removed or chemically inactivated and the animals are systematically examined to determine whether the lesion affected any memory system.

Brain disease and injury.  Here scientists take advantage of individuals who have had unfortunate brain injuries, for example, through stroke or through a brain tumor in a specific area of the brain.  If one finds a memory deficit in the patient, it is likely that the region of the brain that was injured is involved in that memory.
A classic study on localization of memory was the result of surgery performed on Henry Molaison, a patient who was only known to the scientific community as “H.M.” until his death in 2008.  H. M. is famous in neuroscience literature because his brain provided major insights into the localization of memory function.  In the 1950’s, H.M. was diagnosed with intractable epilepsy, and while there are pharmacologic treatments, in some cases the only treatment is to remove the portion of the brain that is causing the seizures.  Consequently, H.M.'s hippocampus was removed bilaterally.  Figure 7.6 (right) is an MRI of a normal individual showing the hippocampal region, whereas Figure 7.6 (left) shows a MRI of patient H.M. after the removal of the hippocampus.
Before the operation, H,M, had a fine memory, but after the operation, H.M. had a very severe memory deficit.  Specifically, after the operation H.M.'s ability to form any new memories for facts and events was severely impaired; he had great difficulty learning any new vocabulary words; he could not remember what happened the day before.  So if H.M. had an interview the day following a previous interview, he would have little or no memory about the interview or events during it.  This study clearly indicated that the hippocampus was critical for memory formation.  But whereas H.M. had great difficulty forming new memories for facts and events, he still had all of his old memories for facts and events.  Specifically, he had all his childhood memories, and all of his memories prior to the operation.  This type of memory deficit is called anterograde amnesia.  (In contrast, retrograde amnesia refers to loss of old memories.) The studies on H.M. clearly indicated that whereas the hippocampus is critical for the formation of new memories, it is not where the old memories are stored.  It is now known that those old memories are stored in other parts of the brain, such as in the frontal cortex. The process by which an initially labile memory is transformed into a more enduring form is called consolidation.  This process involves the memory being stored in a different part of the brain than the initial site of its encoding.

H,M, was also interesting in that while his ability to form new memories for facts and events was severely impaired, he could form new memories for skills and habits.  While he could form new memories for skills and habits,  he did not know that he had the skills!  He had no awareness of the memory; he couldn’t declare that he had it. This finding clearly indicated that the memory for skills and habits are not formed in the hippocampus. Collectively, we learned from these studies on H.M. and other patients that memory is distributed throughout the nervous system, and different brain regions are involved in mediating different types of memory. 

Figure 7,7 summarizes many decades of research on the anatomical locus of memory systems. The medial temporal lobe and structures like the hippocampus are involved with memories for facts and events; the striatum is involved with memories for skills and habits; the neocortex is involved with priming; the amygdala is involved with emotional memories; and the cerebellum with simple forms of associative learning.  Lower brain regions and the spinal cord contain even simpler forms of learning.  In summary, memory is not stored in a single place in the brain.  It is distributed in different parts of the brain.
Much of what has been learned about the neural and molecular mechanisms of learning and memory have come from the use of so called “model systems” that are amenable to cellular analyses.  One of those model systems is illustrated in Figure 7.8A.  Aplysia californica is found in the tidal pools along the coast of Southern California.  It is about six inches long and weighs about 150 grams.  At first glance it is an unpromising looking creature, but neuroscientists have exploited the technical advantages of this animal to gain fundamental insights into the molecular mechanisms of memory.  Indeed, the pioneering discoveries of Eric Kandel using this animal were recognized by his receipt of the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 2000.  Aplysia have three technical advantages. 

First, it exhibits simple forms of nondeclarative (implicit) learning like classical (Pavlovian) conditioning, operant conditioning and sensitization. 

Second, Aplysia have a very simple nervous system. Compared to the 100’s of billions of nerve cells in the human brain, the entire nervous system of this animal only has about 10,000 cells.  Those cells are distributed in different ganglia like the one illustrated in Figure 7.8B.  Each ganglia like this one  has only about 2,000 cells, yet it is capable of mediating or controlling a number of different behaviors.   This means that any one behavior can be controlled by 100 neurons or even less.  One has the potential of working out the complete neural circuit underlying a behavior, and then, after training the animal, the neural circuit can be examined to identify what has changed in the circuit that underlies the memory. 

Third, the ganglia contain neurons that are very large.  Figure 7.8B shows a ganglion under a dissecting microscope.  It is about 2mm in diameter.  The spherical structures throughout the ganglia are the cell bodies of individual neurons.  Each neuron is identifiable and has a unique localization and function. A related advantage is that individual neurons can be removed and placed in culture medium where they can survive for many days. Indeed, multiple neurons can be removed from the ganglia and they reestablish their normal synaptic connections, thereby providing a very powerful experimental system to study the physiology of nerve cells and the properties of the connections between them.  Figure 7.8C shows an example of a sensory neuron (small cell to the right) and a motor neuron (large cell to the left) in culture.  In the micrograph it is possible to see the shadow of a microelectrode that has impaled the sensory neuron, and the shadow of a microelectrode that has impaled a motor neuron for performing intracellular recordings. 
Figures 7,9 and 7,10 illustrate a simple behavior exhibited by the animal and a simple form of learning called sensitization.  The animal is tested by stimulating its tail with a weak electric shock (7.9) or a weak mechanical tap (7.10).  These stimuli elicit defensive reflex withdrawals of the body, which includes the tail and nearby sites such as the gill and a fleshy spout called the siphon.  In response to test stimuli delivered every five minutes, the withdrawals are fairly reliable.  They are about the same duration each time (Figures 7.9B, C, 7.10A).  But if a strong noxious stimulus (e.g., an electric shock) is delivered to another part of the animal such as its body wall, subsequent test stimuli to the tail give enhanced responses (Figure 7.9B and 7.10B).  This is an example of a simple form of learning called sensitization.  It is defined as the enhancement of the response to a test stimulus as a result of delivering a strong generally noxious stimulus to the animal. In a sense, the animal is learning that it is in a “fearful” environment.  Sensitization is a ubiquitous form of learning that is exhibited by all animals including humans.
Neural circuit.  We can take advantage of the large nerve cells of Aplysia, and the ability to make intracellular recordings from them, to work out the underlying neural circuit.  Figure 7.11 illustrates a simplified view of the key components of the underlying neural circuit.  Stimulation of the skin activates sensory neurons (SN) (only one of which is illustrated here) which make glutamatergic excitatory synaptic connections (triangles) with motor neurons (MN).  If the summated synaptic input to the motor neurons is sufficiently large, the motor neurons will be activated and action potentials will propagate out of the ganglion to cause an eventual contraction of the muscle.  So stimulation of the skin excites sensory neurons, the sensory neurons activate motor neurons, and motor neurons contract the muscles.  Also, it should be evident that the greater the activation of the motor neurons, the greater will be the subsequent reflex response. This reflex in Aplysia is similar to the knee jerk or stretch reflex mediated by similar circuitry in the vertebrate spinal cord.
Mechanisms of sensitization.  Sensitizing stimuli lead to the release of the neurotransmitter serotonin (5-HT) (represented by cell labeled IN and colored in purple on Figure 7.11).  5-HT modulates the strength of the connection between the sensory neuron and the motor neuron.  An action potential in the sensory neuron before the learning produces a small excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) in the motor neuron (Figure 7.12A). But, after delivering the sensitizing stimulus, an action potential in the sensory neuron leads to a larger synaptic potential in the motor neuron (Figure 7.12C).  A larger synaptic potential in the motor neuron increases the probability that the motor neuron will be activated to a greater extent and produce a larger contraction of the muscle (i.e., sensitization).
One principle about learning and memory derived from studies of this simple animal, and this principle holds true in our brains as well, is that learning involves changes in the strength of synaptic connections between neurons.  Learning is not due to a reorganization of the nervous system or the growth of new neurons.  What has changed is that the strength of a previously existing connection is modified. 

Now we can take this analysis one step further and ask what are the biochemical mechanisms that underlie learning and memory.  We will divide the discussion into two temporal domains of memory; short-term memory and long-term memory. We have already discussed different types of memory such as declarative and nondeclarative memory.  There are also different temporal domains of memory.  Short-term memories are like the memory for a telephone number that last several minutes, and long-term memory are memories that last days, weeks or a lifetime.
Mechanisms of short-term sensitization. The mechanisms for the short-term memory for sensitization are illustrated in Figure 7.12B. The sensitizing stimulus leads to release of the neurotransmitter 5-HT.  5-HT binds the two types of receptors on the sensory neuron; one is coupled to the DAG/PKC system, and the other is coupled to the cyclic AMP/PKA system.  These are the same general cascades that you learned in biochemistry.  Learning mechanisms have evolved to co-opt some of the biochemical machinery that are already present in all cells used them specifically for a memory mechanism in nerve cells.  The protein kinases exert two types of actions. First, they regulate the properties of different membrane channels (the small gates on the illustration (Figure 7.12) represent membrane channels that underlie the initiation and the repolarization of the action potential).  Consequently after a sensitizing stimulus, the amount of calcium that enters the synaptic terminal during an action potential and causes the release of transmitter will be enhanced.  In addition, the modulation of the membrane channels leads to an increase in the excitability of the sensory neuron and as a result a greater number of action potentials will be elicited by a test stimulus to the skin.  Second, the kinases regulate other cellular processes involved in transmitter release, such as the size of the pool of synaptic vesicles available for release in response to the influx of Ca2+ with each action potential. Finally, 5-HT leads to changes in the properties of the postsynaptic motor neuron.  Specifically, 5-HT leads to an increase in the number of glutamate receptors.  The consequences of these processes can be seen by comparing the strength of the synaptic connection produced by a single action potential before (Figure 7.12A) and after (Figure 7.12C) sensitization.  The specific details of all the currents and processes are not critical.  However, it is important to know the general principles.  One principle is that learning involves the engagement of second messenger systems.  Here both the protein kinase C (PKC) and the protein kinase A (PKA) systems are involved.  This is a fairly general principle.  In every example of learning that has ever been examined, whether vertebrate or invertebrate, second messenger systems are engaged.  A second principle is that memory involves the modulation of neuronal membrane channels.  These can include channels that directly regulate transmitter release (i.e., Ca2+ channels in the presynaptic neuron), channels that regulate neuronal excitability, and channels that mediate synaptic responses in the postsynaptic neuron.  A third principle is that cyclic AMP is one of the critical second messengers that is involved in memory.  Given this information, you can begin to think about how memory could be improved based on your knowledge of the underlying biochemistry.
We have discussed a mechanism for a short-term memory.  It is "short-term" because the memory is transient and that is so because the underlying biochemical changes are transient.  The duration of the memory is dependent on how long the various substrate proteins (e.g., membrane channels) are phosphorylated.  PKA will only be activated for a short time after a brief stimulus because cyclic AMP will be degraded and PKA levels will decrease.  Protein phosphatases will remove the phosphate groups on the substrate proteins that are “storing” the memory. 
Mechanisms of long-term sensitization.  There are two major differences between short-term and long-term memories.  Long-term memories involve changes in protein synthesis and gene regulation, whereas short-term memories do not.  And, long-term memories in many cases involve structural modifications.  Figure 7.13 illustrates examples of the processes of two sensory neurons that have been filled with a dye, one from an untrained animal and one from a trained animal.  Shown are the thick axonal process of the neuron and many fine branches.  Along the branches are seen small dot-like swellings or varicosities.  These varicosities are the presynaptic terminals of the sensory neurons that make contact with other neurons like the motor neurons.  (The motor neurons cannot be seen because only the sensory neurons were filled with the dye.)  Part B of Figure 7.13 shows an example of a sensory neuron that has been injected with a dye in an untrained animal, and Part A shows one that has been filled with a dye 24 h after sensitization training.  There is a major difference between these two neurons.  The neuron from the trained animal has a greater number of branches and a greater number of synaptic varicosities than the neuron from the untrained animal.  Therefore, long-term memory involves changes in the structure of neurons including growth of new processes and synapses.  So, to the extent that you remember anything about this material on memory tomorrow, or next week, or next year, it will be because structural changes in synapses are beginning in your brains!
Given that long term memory involves changes in gene expression, a major goal of neuroscientists is to identify the specific genes and proteins that are involved in long-term memory.  Figure 7.14 illustrates some of the genes and the proteins that are involved in long-term sensitization.  Note that cAMP, one of the second messengers involved in the short-term memory, is also involved in the induction of long-term memory.  But now, in addition to its effects on the phosphorylation of membrane channels, cAMP, through PKA, phosphorylates transcription factors such as CREB (cAMP responsive element binding protein).  Transcription factors like CREB, when phosphorylated, are capable of regulating gene expression, which leads to changes in the expression of proteins that are important for inducing and maintaining the long-term changes in synaptic strength and therefore the long term memory.

Note that there is not a single “magic memory gene” – rather, the induction and maintenance of memory, even in a single neuron, involves the engagement of multiple genes and proteins that act synergistically to change the properties of the neurons and regulate the properties of the neuron and the strength of the synapse.  Also note that changes in gene expression do not occur all at once – there are different phases.  Some changes in gene expression occur early, some even 24 hours after the learning occurs. 
An enduring form of synaptic plasticity called long-term potentiation (LTP) is believed to be involved in many examples of declarative memory. It is present in the hippocampus, which is known to be involved in declarative memories.  LTP can be studied in brain slice preparations where an electric shock (test stimulus) can be delivered to afferent fibers and the resultant summated EPSP can be recorded in the postsynaptic neuron (Figure 7.15A). If the pathway is repeatedly stimulated (e.g., every minute), the amplitude of EPSP is constant (Figure 7.15B).

Delivering a brief 1-sec duration train of high frequency (100 Hz) stimuli (i.e., the tetanus) to the afferent nerve produces two types of enhancement in the postsynaptic neuron.  First, there is a transient facilitation called post-tetanic potentiation (PTP) that dies away after several minutes. Second, following the PTP is a very enduring enhancement of the EPSP called LTP. LTP is the kind of mechanism necessary to store a long-term memory (Figure 7.15B).
The NMDA-type glutamate receptor is critical for some forms of LTP, in particular LTP at the CA3-CA1 synapse in the hippocampus. The postsynaptic spines of CA1 neurons have two types of glutamate receptors; NMDA-type glutamate receptors and AMPA-type glutamate receptors (Figures 7.16A). Both receptors are permeable to Na+ and K+, but the NMDA-type has two additional features. First, in addition to being permeable to Na+, it also has a significant permeability to Ca2+. Second, this channel is normally blocked by Mg2+.

Even if glutamate binds to the NMDA receptor and produces a conformational change, there is no efflux of K+ or influx of Na+ and Ca2+ because the channel is "plugged up" or blocked by the Mg2+. Thus, a weak test stimulus will not open this channel because it is blocked by Mg2+. A weak test stimulus will produce an EPSP, but that EPSP will be mediated by the AMPA receptor. It is as if the NMDA receptor were not even there.

Now consider the consequences of delivering a tetanus (Figure 7.16B). During the tetanus, there will be spatial and temporal summation of the EPSPs produced by the multiple afferent synapses on the common postsynaptic cell (Figure 7.15A). Consequently, the membrane potential of the postsynaptic neuron will be depolarized significantly, much more so than the depolarization produced by a single afferent test stimulus. Because the inside of the cell becomes positive with the large synaptic input, the positively charged Mg2+ is repelled by the inside positivity and is "thrust" out of the channel.  Now the channel is unplugged and Ca2+ can enter the spine through the unblocked NMDA receptor. The Ca2+ that enters the cell activates various protein kinases, which then trigger long-term changes. One component of the long-term change is the insertion of new AMPA receptors into the postsynaptic membrane (Figure 7.16C).  Therefore, after the tetanus, the transmitter released from the presynaptic neuron by a test stimulus will bind to a greater number of receptors on the postsynaptic neuron.  If more receptors are bound and hence opened, a larger (potentiated) EPSP (i.e., LTP) will be produced (Figure 7.16C).  In addition to an increase in the number of postsynaptic AMPA receptors, there is evidence that a greater amount of transmitter is released from the presynaptic neurons.  The combination of the presynaptic and postsynaptic effects would act synergistically to increase the size of the synaptic potential in the postsynaptic neuron.  Note that this example of a synaptic mechanism for declarative memory bears some similarity to the synaptic mechanism for the example of nondeclarative memory (sensitization) discussed previously. Although the specific details differ, both involve activation of second messenger systems and regulation of membrane channels.  Therefore, at a fundamental mechanistic level, there does not appear to be significant differences between the two major classes of memory systems.  The major difference appears to be the brain region and the neural circuit and into which the learning mechanism is embedded.
With a knowledge of some of the genes and proteins involved in memory, we can use this information to try to both test the role of specific proteins in memory and also to improve memory. One experimental way of approaching the issue is to use transgenic technology in which a gene of interest can be over expressed in an animal by introducing it into an egg cell.  When the offspring develop into adults, their performance on memory tests can be examined.  An example of this approach is illustrated in Figure 7.17.  Here the role of the NMDA receptor was examined by Joe Tsien and his colleagues, who were then at Princeton University.  If NMDA receptors are important for the induction of LTP, and LTP is important for declarative memory, one would expect that animals that had a greater number of NMDA receptors would learn more readily.  NMDA receptors were over expressed in mice and the mice were tested on the object discrimination test that was discussed earlier in the Chapter. 

To assess the performance of a mouse on the object recognition task, the experimenter measures the amount of time for some predefined period the mouse spends exploring the one object, versus the amount of time the mouse spends exploring the other object.  If the mouse remembers that it had seen one of the objects previously, it will spend more time exploring the novel one.  As illustrated in Figure 7.17, one hour after the initial presentation of the objects, the mice do very well on the test.  Indeed, they are correct about 100% of the time.  They know the novel object.  However, one day later the memory performance is rather poor, and after three days it is even worse.  By one week, mice show no recognition memory.

What about the mice that received the extra NMDA receptors?  Now one day after training they have perfect memory!  So the extra receptors have led to an improved memory performance.  That’s the good news – but the bad news is that the memory is no better one week later. This somewhat disappointing finding should not be surprising.  Although NMDA receptors are important in memory, they are not the whole story.  As indicated earlier in the Chapter, memory involves the synergistic engagement of multiple genes and proteins.  So to improve memory further, it will be necessary to manipulate multiple genes.  At the present time it is difficult to do so, but, it probably will become possible in the near future.  It will also be possible to over express genes of interest in targeted areas of the human brain.  The future for treating individuals with memory disabilities looks very promising.

A major issue of the topic of higher cortical function is the degree to which mental and cognitive functions are located in specific brain regions.

We begin by looking at the neuroscience of language. Language is one of the most elaborate cognitive behaviors. The pioneer of brain localization of language function was a French neurologist, Pierre Paul Broca, working around the time of our civil war—1861. Broca extended a theory proposed by Gall (Franz Joseph Gall) that the cortex was divided into 35 or more regions for attributes such as hope, generosity, and secretiveness. According to Gall, these were cortical “organs.” They grew with use, much as muscles did with exercise, and caused bumps and ridges on the skull. Thus, was born the science of phrenology. Hundreds and thousands of skulls were collected and bumps were correlated to attributes and personalities of those individuals. From a study of these correlations, so-called experts would go out into the population and “read” the bumps of living people to divine their attributes and personalities—all for a fee, of course.

Broca’s work differed from Gall’s. Broca argued for examining brains of people with clinical disorders for lesions that might then indicate the brain region responsible for the disorder. Thus was born the field of neuropsychology which flourishes today and has provided much of what we know about localized function in the brain.

In 1861, Broca described a patient named Leborgne who could understand language but could not speak. He had no motor deficits to account for his inability to speak. He could whistle, utter isolated words, and sing the lyrics of a melody. Postmortem examination of Leborgne’s brain showed a lesion in the posterior region of the frontal lobe. This region is now called Broca’s area. A few years later, in 1876, Karl Wernicke described another type of aphasia. This aphasia, or language disorder, involved a failure to comprehend language rather than a failure to speak. Broca’s patient could understand language but not speak, whereas Wernicke’s patient could speak but not understand language. Location of the lesion in Wernicke’s patient was different from Broca’s patient. It was in at the junction of the temporal, parietal and occipital lobes—now called Wernicke’s area. The junction of temporal, parietal, and occipital lobes is an important area to remember.

Wernicke proposed that language involves separate motor and sensory programs located in different cortical regions. The motor program, located in Broca’s area was suitably situated in front of the motor area that controls the mouth, tongue, and vocal cords. The sensory program, located in Wernicke’s area, was suitably surrounded by the posterior association cortex that integrates auditory, visual, and somatic sensations.

Wernicke’s model is still referred to today. According to this model, initial processing of spoken or written words takes place in the primary and unimodal sensory areas for vision and audition. This information is then conveyed to the angular gyrus of the posterior association area. This was thought to be the area where either written or spoken words were transformed into a common neural representation. Then, these representations were thought to be transferred to Wernicke’s area where they were recognized as language and associated with meaning. Without meaning, there can be no language comprehension. These neural representations along with their associated meanings are then passed along, via the arcuate fasiculus, to Broca’s area where it is transformed into a motor representation that allows for speech.

From the Wernicke model, Wernicke correctly predicted a third type of aphasia—conduction aphasia. Comprehension and speech articulation are spared but these two areas were thought to be disconnected. Patients can comprehend and speak, but they omit parts of words and substitute incorrect sounds. They are aware of their errors but are unable to correct them.

More recent results, such as those from functional imaging, have shown that the Wernicke model is an over simplification. There are, as we will see, other brain areas responsible for different aspects of language. We will briefly consider different aspects that constitute language before considering brain areas that control these different language aspects.
Language is communication through words or symbols for words. Words are an association between a sound and meaning. By 6 years of age children understand about 13,000 words and by the end of high school about 60,000 words. Thus, children connect a new sound to a meaning about every 90 waking minutes.

The issue is whether this development is innate or learned, and was most prominently raised as an issue by seminal books published in the late 1950s by Skinner and Chomsky. In support of innate development of language, all cultures learn language. Even children together in a social environment but deprived of any developed language—invent their own language. In support of learned language, young children deprived of language (e.g., parents are deaf or depraved) acquire language fully if learning takes place before puberty. If after puberty, they are very inept at language. If an infant has its whole left hemisphere removed, it will develop language fully in the right hemisphere. If adults have left hemisphere removed all language skills disappear forever. Finally, young children acquire several languages perfectly, whereas later in life it is much more difficult and with telltale signs of accents and grammatical errors. Thus, from the nurture standpoint there appears to be a critical period for language acquisition. From a neurological standpoint the developing brain is plastic with regard to language for several years.
If language is innate then we can ask: When did it evolve? Language may have evolved as long ago as 2 million years ago. One of the things about language is that it is lateralized to an area called Broca’s area in the left hemisphere. Even the skulls of Homo habilis, a distant ancestor that lived about 3 million years ago, show an enlargement in the region of Broca’s area of the left hemisphere. If language evolved, should not a common evolutionary ancestor have passed this ability along to apes? Possibly, but on the other hand the division between apes and 6-8 million years ago may have allowed sufficient time for a separate development language in the evolutionary branch leading to man. One way to answer this question is to identify language in some other species?
We can all think of language-like behavior from our pets. Dogs, for example, understand words like “come”, “dinner”, “fetch”, etc. But is this language?

Parrots have been taught to “talk.” One parrot, Alex, can name, request, or refuse more than 100 objects. When Alex is shown five keys or five corks and is asked verbally by his trainer, “How many?”, Alex answers verbally “five.” He can combine the concepts of number with color and can correctly answer the question, “How many blue key?” Alex knows the concept of same and different. When presented with a pair of objects that differ in matter (wood, plastic, metal), shape (triangle, square, etc.), or color (red, yellow, etc.) and asked “What’s different?” Alex will then “say” the correct answer. Alternatively, a blue wooden square and a red wooden triangle might be presented with the question “What’s same?” and Alex will answer “wood.” Alex can also be presented with novel shapes, colors, or matter and be highly accurate. But, is this language?

Finally, some of the great apes (gorillas, chimpanzees) have been taught symbols or tokens to represent objects and actions and others American Sign Language. These are hand signs used by deaf people, related to the hand signs used by the Native American Indian peoples. In either case they have learned the meaning of several hundred signs or symbols. Is this language?

The answer is probably not. They learn by rote behavior that if they want to get the treat (e.g., apple) that they have to put the prefix “Give me” before making the sign for “apple.” Apparently, they do not learn the meaning of the phrase “Give me.” What evidence would be necessary to show that they did learn the meaning? Related is that the word strings of sentences that these apes make do not increase with training as they do with young children.

This then brings up the question: If this is not language, then what aspect of language is missing? The answer is grammar.
If language is communication through words, then the next question is how are these words associated to provide this communication. The answer, of course, is grammar. Grammar is the rules that allow thoughts to be expressed in words and words connected into sentences when speaking and comprehending. Language is not how people ought to talk; it is how they do talk. For example, “ain’t” communicates as well as “isn’t.”

Grammar can be subdivided into morphology, phonology, prosody, and syntax.

Morphology specifies the rules for combining words into longer words by adding prefixes and suffixes so, for example, the subject and predicate will agree.
Phonology specifies the rules for combining sound elements and phonemes into words. The sound elements do not have meaning in themselves, e.g., the letters D-O-G has a different meaning from the reverse G-O-D.
Prosody is the pattern of intonation and stress that for example allows us to distinguish questions from statements.
Syntax specifies how words are to be combined into phrases and sentences so that the meaning will be clear. An unclear example would be the line from Animal Crackers by Groucho Marx: “I once shot an elephant in my pajamas. How he got into my pajamas I’ll never know.”
Aphasia is a language disorder. Such disorders revealed areas of the brain critical for language.

What makes language special in terms of associating its function with specific brain areas is that language is lateralized to the left hemisphere. If it were represented in both hemispheres then brain damage would be less likely to reveal aphasia because the other undamaged hemisphere would just take over language function.

Language is lateralized to the left hemisphere in about 96% of the population. This percentage is somewhat less for left-handed than right-handed people.

How was lateralization of language discovered? At least four lines of evidence have been important: 1) Neuropsychological studies of patients who suffered stroke, head injuries, herpes encephalitis, and degenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s and Pick’s disease; 2) functional imaging studies of normal individuals; 3) electrical stimulation of patients undergoing neurosurgery; 4) split-brain patients.

Continued work on the neuropsychology of language disorders from patients with lesions and from stimulation studies of patients’ brains prior and during neurosurgery, has greatly elaborated on the Wernicke model of language. For example, Wernicke’s area has been subdivided into different functions. Lesions of the frontal-temporal area produce lexical deficits—problems in understanding meaning. Lesions of the parietal-temporal region produce syntactical deficits—problems in relating words in sentences.
Implementation system: Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas along with areas of the insular cortex and basal ganglia analyze incoming speech in terms of phonemes and other grammar.

Mediational system: Areas of the temporal, parietal, and frontal association cortices that surround the implementation system. The mediational system fosters communication between the implementation system and conceptual system.

Conceptual system: Areas distributed throughout the association cortices that are important in learning, memory, and conceptual knowledge. These are associative areas considered in the next lecture, Higher Order Cortical Function: Association and Executive Areas.
The different language and association areas are not as uniform in function as once thought. They have been subdivided, several times in some cases. It becomes awkward and imprecise to refer to these different brain areas in terms of lobes, sulci, and gyri. Many researchers use Brodmann’s numbering scheme. Korbinian Brodmann, a German anatomist, was inspired by Broca’s and Wernicke’s discoveries. At the turn of the century, Brodmann used cortical cytoarchitecture, the common appearance of neurons within the cortex, to identify 52 distinct areas.
Broca aphasia is damage to the inferior left frontal gyrus, which are Brodmann’s areas 44 and 45 including underlying white matter, insula and basal ganglia.

In many casual conversations, Broca aphasics appear normal in comprehension. Their speech, however, is obviously impaired. Speech is slow. Articulation is impaired and melodic intonation (Prosody) is lacking. The difficulty is not so much in pronunciation of individual sounds as in transitions from one sound to another sound. Thus, there is not a smooth articulation of flowing speech. In severe cases, perseveration of motor elements may be so great as to prevent pronunciation of simple words. For example, a Broca aphasic might say “2…2…2…2…want to…to…to…go…go…go…home.”

So far, this is according to the Wernicke model. But the normal comprehension is largely an illusion. Since most communication is with simple sentences, Broca aphasics make sense out of a sentence from only a few key words.

If Broca aphasics are given the sentence: “The apple that the boy is eating is red.” They can understand it. Boys eat apples. Apples do not eat boys. Apples are red. Boys are not red.

One can, however, show that comprehension is not normal by their inability to understand the sentence: “The boy that the girl is chasing is tall”. They have difficulty understanding this sentence because either boys or girls can be tall and because boys can chase girls or girls can chase boys. To understand the sentence you have to understand the phrase “that the girl is chasing” to identify whom is chasing and who is tall.

This is a grammar deficit, but grammar is by no means totally absent.
The Broca aphasic is apparently able to detect that “John was finally kissed Louise” is ungrammatical because a passive verb (was kissed) is followed by a direct object.
The actual problem that Broca aphasics have is thought to be a memory problem. Linking two elements in a sentence requires keeping the first element in memory. As the gap between elements to be linked becomes longer, these patients have more trouble.

Functional imaging results tend to support this interpretation that Broca aphasics have a short-term memory problem. A subregion of Broca’s area in normal subjects is more strongly activated (PET imaging) when the gap between elements to be linked is long rather than short. Some activity is apparently going on in this subregion to keep the elements in memory so that they can be linked.
Wernicke aphasia is damage primarily to Brodmann’s area 22 at the junction of the temporal, parietal, and occipital lobes. This is the left auditory association cortex.

Speech is fluent, effortless, and melodic, unlike Broca aphasia. The content, however, is often jumbled. A Wernicke aphasic might say: “Aah dar, the spoon was needed for the telephone.” Even phonemes of individual words can become jumbled. In such cases the words are unintelligible—and are called neologisms. Such a patient might say: “Aoh confondo…noconfulo...he indent the confondo.” Wernicke patients have difficulty in word retrieval, and cannot select words that represent what they intend to say—this is called semantic paraphasia. They may say “headman” for “president.” They also have difficulty comprehending speech of others. It is useful to think of Wernicke’s area as a brain comprehension center, but as we saw with Broca aphasia there was a loss of comprehension there too.

Deaf people who sign with American Sign Language (ASL) use these same areas of the brain in the same way as those who speak language. Lesions in Wernicke area of deaf people loose ability to comprehend sign (ASL). Those with lesions in Broca’s area lose the ability to make signs.
Conduction aphasia is caused primarily by damage to Brodmann’s areas 39 and 40.

Speech production and comprehension are less affected than in Broca or Wernicke aphasias. They cannot repeat sentences accurately. And they have trouble naming pictures and objects. We will say more about these anomies in the next section.

Conduction aphasia is not produced by disconnection of the arcuate fasiculus alone as Wernicke thought. Damage producing conduction aphasia, however, does destroy many interconnections among the temporal, parietal, insular and frontal cortices that are responsible for assembling phonemes into words.
Transcortical aphasia can manifest itself as transcortical motor aphasia and transcortical sensory aphasia. The name transcortical comes from damage to pathways in addition to damage of language areas. The pathways that are damaged are those that connect language areas to other parts of the brain.

A way to remember these transcortical aphasias is that the relation between transcortical motor aphasia and transcortical sensory aphasia is similar to the relation between Broca aphasia and Wernicke aphasia in terms of articulation vs. comprehension, respectively.

Transcortical motor aphasia is a disconnection of the language areas from areas that initiate and control speech. For example, these patients have trouble saying “kick” in response to “ball”, even though they use these same words correctly in ordinary speech. They can, however, repeat even very long sentences.

Transcortical motor aphasia is caused by damage to the left dorsolateral frontal area. This is an area anterior and superior to Broca’s area.

Transcortical sensory aphasics have fluent speech with impaired comprehension—very much like Wernicke aphasics. But unlike Wernicke aphasics, they can repeat sentences accurately.

Transcortical sensory aphasia is caused by damage to in the area of the junction of the temporal, parietal, and occipital lobes.
Like the term implies—it’s everything. Global aphasics have all of the disabilities of Broca, Wernicke, and Conduction combined. They cannot comprehend, repeat sentences, or speak meaningfully. They do, however, speak in expletives, and can recite such things as the days of the week.

Global aphasia is caused by damage to anterior language region, basal ganglia and insula (as in Broca aphasia), posterior language region (as in Wernicke aphasia) and superior temporal gyrus (as in conduction aphasia). Typically, this large amount of damage is caused by infarct in the middle cerebral artery.
Below are some simulated examples of the capacity for spontaneous speech, comprehension, and repetition in aphasics.
Dysarthria is the inability to control muscles of articulation and produces speech that is weak, flaccid and systematically distorted. Apraxia is a deficit in planning the desired speech movements and produces errors phonemically similar to the target word, for example saying “yawyer” for “lawyer” or “cookun” for “cushion”. Apraxia nearly always occurs in Broca’s aphasia and accounts for the slow effortful style characteristic of Broca’s aphasics. But recent evidence indicates that not all apraxia patients are Broca aphasics. There are, for example, patients who have apraxia but not Broca aphasia and these patients all have lesions of the insula (island of cortex) located at the superior tip of the precentral gyrus.
Specialization of language in the brain may be best shown by different areas of the brain that are active when naming different kinds of objects. For example, the naming of animals is apparently located in the medial occipital cortex whereas naming of tools appears to be in the left middle temporal gyrus.
Some patients cannot place the appropriate stress, timing or intonation on words in their sentences. This condition is called prosody.

The right hemisphere controls prosody. It has an organization that roughly parallels the arrangement of Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas of the left hemisphere. The right inferior frontal gyrus is the site for articulating or producing prosody. The right posterior temporoparietal region is the site for comprehending prosody.

The sentence “Bill is here.” has stress on the first word, whereas the sentence “Bill is here?” has stress on the last word. A schoolteacher, for example, with a developing prosody deficit began to have difficulty controlling students in her class. She had feelings of anger when the students misbehaved and desire to assert her authority in order to reestablish control, but she could not convey these feelings because she could not place appropriate stress on her speech.

Some patients with prosody deficits cannot comprehend emotional tone or prosody of others that are speaking. These patients don’t understand jokes and have difficulty relating to people in social gatherings.
Alexia is the inability to read and agraphia is the inability to write. These inabilities may be present individually or together and combined with aphasia. Vision is bilateral in the occipital lobes. Alexia results from disruption of visual input from both hemispheres to the language areas of the left hemisphere. PET functional imaging studies show that reading activates an area in the left hemisphere that is just anterior to the visual cortex. This may be the critical area that when damaged results in alexia.
Dyslexia is a reading disorder. It is often referred to as developmental dyslexia. Estimates of the population that it effects range from 10 to 30%. Its cause is not known for sure, and there may be multiple causes.
One possibility is that, like alexia, there may be abnormalities in connections between visual and language areas.

Another possibility is that there might be a deficit in hemispheric specialization. In dyslexic males, unlike normal males, the left planum temporale is not larger that the right one. There is incomplete segregation of cell layers. There are clusters of neurons that appear to be inappropriately connected. Maybe the migration of neurons to the left temporal cortex during development was slowed or somehow disrupted.

Another possibility is that conduction velocity in the magnocellular pathway of the visual system is slowed. The cells in this pathway are abnormally small. Dyslexic patients have trouble processing fast, high-contrast stimuli, like words.
Higher-order integrative cortical areas, called association areas, intervene between the sensory inputs and motor outputs. Hierarchical organization of the cortex was proposed in the 1870s by the famous British neurologist, John Hughlings Jackson. These association areas are the site of cognitive processing and are the focal areas in the rapidly developing field of cognitive neuroscience.
Three multimodal association areas will be discussed in conjunction with three unimodal association areas and three primary sensory areas.

Limbic association area
Located in the anterior-ventral portion of the temporal lobe, the parahippocampal gyrus.
Links emotion with many sensory inputs.
Important in learning and memory.
Posterior association area
Located at the junction of occipital, temporal and parietal lobes.
Links information from primary and unimodal sensory areas
Important in perception and language.
Anterior association area
Located in the prefrontal cortex.
Links information from other association areas.
Important in memory, planning, and higher-order concept formation.
Three unimodal association areas are located adjacent to their respective primary sensory cortical areas as shown in the figure. The general principle to be learned here is that as one gets further away from the primary sensory areas the associative functions become more general.
Sensory information is processed and sent from receptors along parallel pathways through primary sensory cortex and unimodal association cortex to the posterior multimodal association cortex of each hemisphere—the posterior parietal and temporal cortices.

The posterior multimodal association cortex is highly connected to the anterior association areas which in turn are responsible for conceptual cognitive functions and planning motor actions.

After planning motor actions in the anterior association area, the actual processing of the motor response output is the reverse of processing in the sensory (input) system. The premotor cortex is rostral to the motor cortex—Brodmann’s areas 6 and 8.
Retrieval of information that has been learned apparently is also a reverse of the paths and structures used in storing this information.
Damage to posterior association areas also sometimes including parts of the unimodal association areas can result in agnosia, a Greek word meaning “not knowing.” Lesions of the visual posterior association area can result in the inability to recognize familiar faces or learn new faces while at the same time leave other aspects of visual recognition intact—a deficit called prosopagnosia. These patients can identify a face as a face, its parts, and specific emotions from facial expressions, but they cannot identify a face as a particular person. They often cannot recognize relatives such as parents or children and in some instances cannot recognize their own face. They have not lost knowledge about their close relatives and friends because they use sound of the voice and other cues to recognize them. Lesions causing prosopagnosia are always bilateral on the inferior surface of both occipital lobes and extend forward to the inner surface of the temporal lobes.

Patients with lesions in the posterior multimodal association cortex (i.e., posterior parietal cortex) can perceive and draw objects, but they cannot name them—a deficit called associative agnosia. They haven’t forgotten the names of these objects because they can correctly name them by touch. Other damage to the occipital lobes and surrounding region can render patients unable to draw objects, but remarkably can still name them—a deficit called apperceptive agnosia.
There are other cases where lesions in similar areas of the right and left hemisphere produce almost complementary perceptual differences. Right hemisphere damage disrupts perception of global objects, while left hemisphere damage disrupts percept of local objects. This is found only in acute stages immediately after a stroke and only with lesions centered in the temporal-parietal junction (TPJ).
Agnosias of right posterior parietal visuocortex are some of the most remarkable. The multimodal posterior association area receives inputs from the visual and auditory systems and from the hippocampus. They result from an inability to perceive objects despite normally functioning sensory systems. These patients ignore things on the left including the left halves of objects and the left half of their own body. This is called contralateral neglect syndrome.

Contralateral neglect is a deficit in the self-image on the left side of their body and a deficit in perceiving the world on the left side. Typically, patients suffering from contralateral neglect syndrome will have paralysis on their left side.

Some patients will not wash or dress their left side—personal neglect syndrome. This neglect may extend to disowning the left side of their body. They will make remarks such as “Who put this arm in my bed” when referring to their left arm.

The neglect can extend from their personal space to the world around them. They may draw a flower, for example, with the petals only on the right-hand side, or clock numbers only on the right-hand side, etc.

A little thought will convince you that it is not a sensory problem. Not just the right half of all objects in the environment have input into such a patients sensory system. Most objects are made up of multiple parts. You can think of these parts as objects. So for example, each petal of the flower is an object. They don’t “see” just the right half of each petal. This is the infinite regress problem.

To show you how complicated and complex this visual neglect problem can become there was a study of a group of visual-neglect patients in Milan, Italy. They were asked in the hospital examining room to imagine the well-known public square, the Piazza del Duomo. They were told that they should imagine that they were facing the cathedral. They were then asked to recall all of the buildings on the square. They recalled only the buildings on their (imagined) right. Then they were told that they were standing on the steps of the cathedral, and imagine that they were facing in the opposite direction. Once again, they were asked to recall all of the buildings on the square. What they did was to recall all of the buildings that they had failed to recall during their first recall because the buildings that were previously on their left are now on their imagined right. Remember this is all in their imagination—their memory.
This is dramatic evidence of a processing deficit. These patients’ memory of the Piazza del Duomo is complete; they don’t have memory deficits about any portion of the square. They also have complete access to their memory of the square. But depending upon their imagined perspective they have a deficit in recalling objects on the left side of their frame of reference. Furthermore, they are apparently unaware of this deficit. Their frame of reference is centered with respect to their body, in memory as well as in real life. Apparently, memories like real world scenes are accessed through the contralateral hemisphere. It is not that the memories were laid down with objects on the left missing because they grew up knowing this square long before their brain lesions occurred. This raises issues of consciousness, self-awareness, executive control of memory.

To further complicate matters unilateral visual neglect can be centered with respect to the object instead of the patient’s body.  A patient with object-centered unilateral visual neglect. Left: patient attends to examiner’s left hand even when rotated. Right: patient neglects examiner’s right hand even when examiner’s body is rotated 90 degrees.

Bilateral parietal damage can produce what is called Balint’s syndrome. This is an interesting syndrome because rather than neglecting both sides of objects and seeing nothing as one might expect with bilateral hemifield neglect, they see one object at a time—simultaneous agnosia. These patients report that an object appears automatically and is replaced at random with another object and they have no control over what object will be perceived. These patients have ADL problems included getting lost, inability to grasp items and they cannot eat, dress, or move around a room without assistance. They can, however, correctly touch parts of their own bodies.
The limbic association area receives information from virtually every other association area and therefore can relate all the stimuli of an event, including its emotional context. The emotion associated with an event can determine whether or how long it is remembered. This is important for survival of all organisms. Indeed, this is what is meant by learning. You can’t have learning without memory. When hungry it is a great relief to find food and then one is more likely to remember the food place later. When one narrowly escapes danger, one is more likely to avoid such predators and places where they reside. The patient HM had his limbic association areas removed bilaterally, he could not form any new explicit memories which rely on context memory, including place, time, and emotion.
The anterior association area is in the frontal lobes. It is rostral to the postcentral gyri, Rolandic fissure, and premotor areas. It has Sylvian fissure as its posterior boundary. It is referred to as prefrontal cortex.

Early evidence of the role of prefrontal cortex came from the case of Phineas T. Gage. Gage was a foreman on railroad construction in the middle of the 19th century. He was reliable, well organized, and hardworking He was tamping in an explosive in a hole drilled into rock with a 13 pound, 3½ foot long iron bar. The charge unexpectedly exploded as he was packing in the explosive charge. What happened was that the tamping rod blew out of the hole and went through the front of his head, destroying large portions of his prefrontal cortex. After he recovered physically (remarkably only a few weeks), his personality had changed. Co-workers reported that “Gage was not Gage.” He was unreliable. His actions were impulsive with little regard for consequences. He became an alcoholic and drifter.

Prefrontal lobotomies were performed in the first half of the twentieth century to relieve psychotic symptoms. These have now been replaced with drug therapy. With a unilateral or bilateral prefrontal lobotomy there is a lack of ability remember and relate things over time. Delayed reward has a greater detrimental effect on learning. Attention span and ability to concentrate are greatly diminished. Abstract reasoning largely disappears. The prefrontal cortex receives massive inputs from the sensory association cortices (somatosensory, visual and auditory) and also from the dorsomedial nucleus of the thalamus. Lesions of the dorsomedial nucleus of the thalamus can produce many of the same symptoms as from prefrontal lobotomy.
The prefrontal cortex is subdivided into three areas.
Prefrontal syndrome (or frontal syndrome) in patients usually refers to damage of the dorsal (superior) prefrontal association area. Most research in the dorsal prefrontal area is concentrated within the dorsolateral prefrontal area. This is the area (46) in the above diagram just dorsal to the principal sulcus (Figure 9.10A). This is a very important area for many higher-order cognitive abilities. The dorsolateral prefrontal area along with the cingulate cortex are involved in attentional processing, planning, rule learning and memory. When trying to perform arithmetic, for example, the patient may begin successfully on successive subtractions of 7 from 100 but then inexplicably shift and say: “100, 93, 93, 73…63 instead of 100, 93, 86, 79, 72 etc. When sequences are being learned, the dorsolateral prefrontal area and the cingulate cortex are highly active. But once learning is complete and automated these areas are no longer active.

Many neurons in the dorsolateral prefrontal area and those in the principal sulcus itself (i.e., dorsal and medial prefrontal cortex) mediate memory about WHERE an object is located. These neurons receive inputs from a dorsal pathway through the posterior parietal cortex. Recordings in monkeys show that “where” neurons respond only to stimuli in a particular position in the visual field and continue to fire during a delay period—presumably memory for the event. When occasionally they stop firing during the delay period, this usually signals that the monkey has forgotten the location. Eye-tracking devices are used to record where the monkey is looking, and the monkey is trained to look towards a particular remembered location.

In contrast to the dorsolateral prefrontal area, neurons in the small area (46) in Figure 9.10A just ventral to the principal sulcus mediate memory about WHAT the object is, its shape and color. This is a target of the ventral visual pathway through the inferior temporal lobe.
The orbitofrontal cortex and the medial prefrontal cortex have direct connections to the amygdala and cingulate cortex of the limbic system and thus provide the emotional component to the planned behavior and memory.

The dominant neurotransmitter in the prefrontal region is dopamine. Dopamine depletion can create lesion like symptoms. Disturbances of the dopaminergic system are thought to contribute to symptoms of schizophrenics and many schizophrenics have hypofunction of the prefrontal cortical regions. Symptoms such as being controlled by alien voices suggest a dysfunction of the executive control system in schizophrenics.

For example, if schizophrenic patients are tested on the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test blood flow to the prefrontal areas is much less than normal individuals. Blood flow to the prefrontal areas is shown to be a functional part of performing this task accurately because when schizophrenics are rewarded for their correct responses blood flow increases much more than it does for normal and they show improved performance.

Further evidence for the close interaction between the prefrontal cortex and cingulate cortex is that neuroimaging of schizophrenics shows impaired activation of the cingulated cortex in cognitive tasks and postmortem histological analysis has shown abnormalities in the cingulated cortex of schizophrenics.
Another way to determine whether or not functions are lateralized to one hemisphere or represented in both hemispheres is to test split-brain patients, patients that have had their corpus callosum transected. Sectioning the corpus callosum is a last resort treatment of intractable epilepsy. Stimuli can then be input to only one hemisphere without the other being aware of these stimuli. Patients can be tested to see how they process these stimuli.
Stimuli are presented to only one hemisphere tachistoscopically. Patients focus on a point straight in the middle of a screen. If the stimulus appears on the left, it goes to the right hemisphere. If the stimulus appears on the right, it goes to the left hemisphere. So, in response to an cone presented on the right (left hemisphere), the patient says “cone.” But when presented on the left, the patient denies seeing anything, and when pressed to give a response, the patient confabulates. So, when the cone stimulus is on the left, is the patient incapable of recognizing the visual stimulus as a cone?

Actually, the patient is capable of recognizing the stimulus as a cone. But you have to be clever to show this ability. The patient can correctly choose, by feel, the correct object. Or the patient can correctly identify it by pointing to it, but only with his left hand.

One might say that this is just matching—even cross modality (visual to haptic) matching—but not language. But you can convince yourself that this is really language because, if you flash the letters D-O-G to the right hemisphere, patients can pick out the model of a dog---only with their left hands, of course.

Other results from split-brain patients have shown that for most people, the left hemisphere is dominant for mathematics as well as language.
The right hemisphere is dominant for music, face recognition, and anything to do with spatial relationships.

For example, even right-handed patients after corpus callosum resectioning (split brain) are better able to draw with their left hands than with their right hands because it is the right hemisphere that controls the left hand.

Thus, the right hemisphere has some functions that are superior to those of the left hemisphere, and the right hemisphere is not just like the left hemisphere without language. Other examples of superiority of the right hemisphere would be that split-brain patients can fit wooden blocks together of different colors to make a pattern better with their left hands than with their right hands, again showing that the right hemisphere is superior in spatial-perceptual tasks.

In conclusion, functions of the brain that are localized to specific brain regions have had considerable clinical importance. Localization of function can explain why certain syndromes are characteristic of disease in specific brain regions. Nevertheless, no part of the brain works in isolation. Each and every part of the brain works in concert with every other part. When a part of the brain is removed, the resulting behavior may reflect more about the adjusted capacities of the remaining “parts” than the removed part.
The right hemisphere is dominant for music, face recognition, and anything to do with spatial relationships.

For example, even right-handed patients after corpus callosum resectioning (split brain) are better able to draw with their left hands than with their right hands because it is the right hemisphere that controls the left hand.

Thus, the right hemisphere has some functions that are superior to those of the left hemisphere, and the right hemisphere is not just like the left hemisphere without language. Other examples of superiority of the right hemisphere would be that split-brain patients can fit wooden blocks together of different colors to make a pattern better with their left hands than with their right hands, again showing that the right hemisphere is superior in spatial-perceptual tasks.

In conclusion, functions of the brain that are localized to specific brain regions have had considerable clinical importance. Localization of function can explain why certain syndromes are characteristic of disease in specific brain regions. Nevertheless, no part of the brain works in isolation. Each and every part of the brain works in concert with every other part. When a part of the brain is removed, the resulting behavior may reflect more about the adjusted capacities of the remaining “parts” than the removed part.
Maximal and average life expectancy -- Aging is a normal biological process that is programmed into the genetics of all species. Thus aging, per se, is not caused by disease. Each animal species has a maximal life expectancy that is hypothesized to be unchangeable. Figure 10.1 is a survival curve for humans illustrating that the maximal life expectancy is approximately 90 years of age. In contrast to maximal life expectancy, the average life expectancy of individuals of a species can be dramatically influenced by environmental influences, especially disease. Thus, Figure 10.1 also shows that the average life expectancy has changed markedly. The figure shows that the average life expectancy, represented by “fifty percent survivors” has increased from 47 years in 1900 to 70+ years in 1989.

Below are listed some of the biological changes that occur in aging humans in the absence of disease.
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) has become the most common neurodegenerative disorder, currently affecting nearly twenty five million worldwide.  AD, which begins with mild memory deficits and modest neuronal death, is followed by progressive extensive neuronal death, eventually leading to severe dementia.  In addition, AD is frequently accompanied by other neurological and personality impairments including slow movements, hampered motor coordination, general confusion and personality change.  AD patients generally live for about 9 years after initial clinical diagnosis.  Thus treatment is necessary for extensive time periods.  This not only places a great burden on caregivers, but the economy as well, with an annual cost yearly of $160 billion worldwide.  AD is estimated to affect over four million people in the USA (10% of the population over 65 and 47% of those over 85).  The pathological features of Alzheimer’s disease, described below, are associated with profound degeneration of neurons and synapses in a few regions of the CNS, including the temporal, parietal, and frontal cortices, all of which are associated with learning and memory processes.  The two most characteristic pathological inclusions found in the brains of AD patients are extracellular deposits of β-amyloid peptides (Aβ) that lead to senile plaque formation and intracellular neurofibrillary tangles of hyperphosphorylated tau.  However, increasing evidence has suggested that inflammation may play a critical role in AD pathogenesis as well.
In this chapter, the changes that occur with AD and the way to clinically diagnose the disease are summarized as a means to describe the disease and to illustrate how the physician must clinically evaluate the possibility of AD. According to the Psychiatric Manual three progressive stages or categories of AD diagnosis are defined. These include: 1) Suspected AD, 2) Probable AD, and 3) Definite AD. Definite AD can only be diagnosed after pathological brain specimens are examined by either biopsy or autopsy. The characteristics used to diagnose AD are listed below.
Definite AD. To make the diagnosis of Definite AD, morphological pathological inclusions must be present in the patient’s CNS. The nature of the pathological changes that occur in AD and the use of some of these features in the diagnosis of AS are described below.
Neurofibrillary tangles. These are non-membrane bound masses of fibers in the cell bodies of neurons, shown in Figure 10.3.  Neurofibrillary tangles contain many tightly adherent pairs of helical filaments.  These are termed paired helical filaments (PHF). Neurofibrillary tangles also contain the same pathological protein, β-amyloid, found in neurite plaques (see below).
Paired helical filaments. Because neurons bearing PHF appear intact and functional, PHF are believed to precede the death of a neuron. Because antibodies to cytoskeleton proteins, such as tau and tubulin, cross-react with PHF it is believed that PHF are composed of modified cytoskeletal proteins. One hypothesis, discussed below, is that PHF are hyper-phosphorylated tau protein. You will recall that tau protein is a microtubule associated protein (MAP)
Neurite plaques are defined as spherical clusters of dystrophic neurites surrounding a core of β amyloid and are found predominantly in gray matter. (Neurite plaques are also called senile plaques or neuritic plaques). These 10 - 100 µm diameter structures are believed to be remnants of degenerated axon terminals. Because neurite plaques are much more common in the aged Alzheimer's brain than in the normal aged brain, they are considered a specific marker for Alzheimer's disease. A number of neurite plaques are shown in in Figure 10,4.
Loss of dendritic branches and spines. As occurs in normal aging, a characteristic feature of AD is a decrease in the number and branches of cortical dendrites and spines. This predicts a decreased synaptic innervation of cortical neurons. In AD there is a large decrease in dendritic branches and spines.
With the above pathological features in mind, the physician examines the CNS biopsy or on autopsy to determine the presence of these histopathologic features. Following the examination of the histological sections, the age related criteria in Table I are used to establish the diagnosis of Definite AD. The areas where plaques and tangle are most abundant are usually the temporal- and neo-cortex. The histopathologic analysis requires multiple CNS samples for microscopic examination. Because these structures also occur in normal aging, the diagnosis of AD depends on the number of pathological features based on the patient’s age; with older age, more inclusions are required before AD is indicated. Other regions examined are the amygdala, hippocampus, basal ganglia, substantia nigra, cerebellum, and spinal cord.
AD, in few cases, has been found to be associated with specific families. Although this happens rather infrequently, it has led to the classification of AD as either familial or sporadic.

Sporadic AD refers to disease that has no clear-cut genetic basis. It is the majority of AD seen in the general population. However, a genetic predisposition may exist for even this disease, as will be discussed at the end of this chapter.

Familian AD (FAD) refers to an inherited disease that is associated with families. Several examples of AD mapped to a specific gene exist. Based on the typical age of onset, familial AD has been sub-classified as early onset and late onset. Both of these will also be presented in more detail at the end of this chapter.
AD, in few cases, has been found to be associated with specific families. Although this happens rather infrequently, it has led to the classification of AD as either familial or sporadic.

Sporadic AD refers to disease that has no clear-cut genetic basis. It is the majority of AD seen in the general population. However, a genetic predisposition may exist for even this disease, as will be discussed at the end of this chapter.

Familian AD (FAD) refers to an inherited disease that is associated with families. Several examples of AD mapped to a specific gene exist. Based on the typical age of onset, familial AD has been sub-classified as early onset and late onset. Both of these will also be presented in more detail at the end of this chapter.
ACH Hypothesis. Among these, the neurotransmitter to receive the greatest attention has been acetylcholine. Morphological and biochemical evidence has implicated a specific deterioration of the cholinergic system that connects the midbrain nucleus basalis of Meynert to the cerebral cortex. The location of the cholinergic neurons is shown in Figure 10.5.
Beta Amyloid / abnormal protein. An important approach to the study of AD is to analyze the abnormal structures found in the AD brain. One of the principle proteins present is β amyloid, named for its β pleated confirmation. This protein was purified, sequenced and an antibody to a synthetic peptide mimicking the sequence produced. The antibody reacts to cerebral β amyloid and not to other protein in plaques and tangles showing that β amyloid is a constituent of AD neuropathological structures. Isolation of the cDNA encoding β amyloid revealed a number of important properties of this protein as described below.
β amyloid is a 4,000-4,500 MW protein that is part of a larger 79,000 MW protein. The larger protein is called amyloid precursor protein (APP). Analysis of the hydrophobicity plots predicts that APP spans the cell membrane and extends into the extracellular space (Fig. 11.6).

A number of observations of the biology of amyloid has lead to the hypothesis that amyloid is the toxic substance that initiates the pathology of AD. This hypothesis, called the amyloid hypothesis, is based on morphological, biochemical, and molecular biological evidence that implicates β amyloid as a seminal, causative agent in Alzheimer's disease. The role of β amyloid in Alzheimer’s disease is based on the following observations:

Amyloid is found in both plaques and tangles and is present in a number of other dementias such as Down's syndrome. Thus, it is hypothesized to be an essential factor in the cause of degeneration.
Antibodies to β amyloid show pre-amyloid deposits in both Down's syndrome and AD brains. This implies that focal amyloid deposition may be the early event in plaque formation for both these diseases. A mutation in the gene for APP is located on chromosome 21. This gene has been identified in several cases of Familial Alzheimer's disease (FAD). Also, recall that Down’s syndrome patients have three copies of chromosome 21.
Based on the above observations, it is hypothesized that an abnormal proteolytic processing of APP occurs in AD. This abnormal processing is believed to generate a toxic 40-kDa peptide referred to as β amyloid or Aβ (Figure 10.7). Recent research has shown that under normal circumstances a proteolytic enzyme, α secretase, cuts APP to produce a normal biological messenger molecule (Figure 10.7a). However, it appears that in AD, the APP is abnormally proteolyzed by two other secretases (Figure 10.7b) to produce the abnormal protein, β amyloid (Aβ). These two secretases, termed β and γ secretase, have been cloned to determine their biology and structural properties. The goal is to generate drugs that can block the secretases and the initiation or progression of AD. One or the other of these secretases may be the product of the senilin genes of familial AD. Also a recent hypothesis, based on the observation that zinc or copper facilitates the formation of insoluble Aβ, is that drugs that chelate these metals will be a good treatment for AD. Clinical trails are underway examining this hypothesis. Recent (Nature Cell Biology 11, 143-153, 2008) research has shown that there may be an abnormal clearing of Aβ that is responsible for its accumulation and toxicity. This provides another strategy for dealing with AD, enhancing the clearance of Aβ.

How Aβ is toxic to cells is not known. One possibility is that it stimulates increased calcium influx, which can lead to cell death through the hyper-phosphorylation of cytostructural proteins, such as tau (see below). Also, recent evidence indicates that Aβ can stimulate the formation of free radicals that may kill neurons. A single methionine in the Aβ molecule appears to be capable of augmenting free radical formation and neuronal death in neuronal cell cultures. High levels of antioxidants such as vitamin E protect neurons from this adverse effect.

There is also evidence that Aβ may have normal functions in the brain.  It has been shown to be: 1) a specific ligand for a number of different receptors and other molecules, 2) transported by complex trafficking pathways, 3) modulated in response to a variety of environmental stressors, and 4) able to induce pro-inflammatory activities.  Recent evidence indicates that Aβ may be an antimicrobial peptide that functions normally as a part of an the innate immune system for the brain.  How these biological functions relate to the possible role of Aβ in AD is not known.
Tau protein hypothesis - Molecular research over the past ten years suggests that abnormal processing of tau (hyper-phosphorylation) may also be an important aspect of AD pathology. (Figure 10.8) Tau is a microtubule associate protein (MAP) composed of a family of six proteins in mammals. These proteins associate with microtubules in the axons of neurons to regulate microtubule growth, assembly and cross-linking. In normal CNS, MAPs, other than tau, regulate microtubule function in dendrites and the cell soma. However in the degenerating neurons in AD patients, 1) tau is found throughout the neuron, not just in the axon. Further 2) tau is also abnormal in that it is phosphorylated much more extensively in AD than in normal brain. Finally, 3) the tau within degenerating neurons is often associated with PHF. Thus the hyper-phosphorylation of tau may be responsible for the altered subcellular distribution of tau and eventual cell death. These observations point to the abnormal phosphorylation and distribution of tau as an important aspect of the pathology of AD. Importantly, the demonstration that tau is distributed differently in degenerating neurons in Alzheimer’s disease than in normal aging has been interpreted to show that Alzheimer’s disease is not merely the end stage of normal aging. One unifying hypothesis is that tau’s hyperphosphorylation may be induced by the β amyloid.
Presenilins - Mutations in two additional genes, presenilin-1 (PS-1), located on chromosome 14 and presenilin-2 (PS-2), located on chromosome, have been determined to be a cause of specific forms of FAD. PS-2 is a close homologue of PS1. To date 45 different PS-1 mutations and two PS-2 mutations have been identified in FAD and these mutations account for up 50 % of early-onset FAD. A suggested mechanism of the mutated presenilins is that they facilitate the alternative proteolysis of APP by γ secretase to form Aβ. This conclusion is supported by evidence that mice transfected with only APP developed plaques late in life, whereas mice with both APP and PS-1 mutations show plaques at a much younger age. This suggests that PS-1 ratchets up the pace of the AD disease process.

ApoE4 hypothesis. ApoE proteins facilitate the shuttling of cholesterol into cells. Researchers at Duke University observed that a specific variant, ApoE4, is elevated in the CSF of Alzheimer’s patients. This observation triggered biochemical and genetic studies of ApoE4 and its role in Alzheimer’s disease. As a consequence, the results of several genetic linkage studies and ApoE4 binding studies linked the ApoE cholesterol shuttling protein to Alzheimer’s disease. These results are:
The apoE4 gene is positively correlated with several classes of Alzheimer's.
Of the three variants of ApoE, the ApoE4 variant predominates in familial Alzheimer’s, whereas the ApoE3 form is most common in the general population.
A similar genetic skew appears in “sporadic” Alzheimer’s.
The presence of ApoE4 predisposes one to Alzheimer’s. Individuals with two copies of this allele are most likely to contract Alzheimer’s, and to develop it earlier as shown in Figure 10,9.
The current information concerning the causes of AFD indicates that it is a genetically heterogeneous disorder. Although most cases of Alzheimer's disease do not exhibit familial inheritance, certain genes appear to act as risk factors for AD. Currently, the best known genetic risk factor for AD is the inheritance of the ε4 allele of the apolipoprotein E on chromosome 19. This gene is implicated in up to 50% of late-onset sporadic Alzheimer's cases. However, geneticists agree that numerous other genes probably also act as risk factors or have protective effects that influence the development of late onset AD. Over 400 genes have been tested for association with late-onset sporadic AD. There is also considerable evidence that Aβ and APP on chromosome 21 play an important role in the etiology of AD. The evidence for genetic basis in FAD and a role for Aβ in sporadic AD include the following: 1) Individuals with Down’s syndrome have three copies of chromosome 21 and consequently make large amount of APP. 2) Down’s syndrome patients exhibit brain pathology virtually identical to AD and suffer dementia. 2) A direct linkage has been made between chromosome 21 and a subset of FAD. 3) In addition a direct linkage has been made between mutations in the genes for presenilins and the facilitation of the abnormal processing of APP to produce Aβ. All of these observations support a role for amaloid in AD pathology.
Several clear risk factors exist for AD. These include being female, family history of neurodegenerative diseases, less education and less intellectually demanding jobs. How these factors fit into the etiology of AD is not known.
The blood-brain barrier (BBB) protects the neural tissue from variations in blood composition and toxins.  Elsewhere in the body the extracellular concentrations of hormones, amino acids and potassium undergo frequent fluctuations, especially after meals, exercise or stressful times.  Since many of these molecules regulate neuronal excitability, a similar change in the composition of interstitial fluid in the CNS can lead to uncontrolled brain activity.  The endothelial cells forming the blood-brain barrier are highly specialized to allow precise control over the substances that enter or leave the brain. 

Discovery of blood-brain barrier. The discovery of the BBB dates back more than 100 years when, in the 1880s, Paul Ehrlich observed that intravenous administration of certain dyes (e.g. trypan blue) stained all organs except the brain and the spinal cord.   He concluded that the dyes had a lower affinity for binding to the nervous system as compared to other tissues.  In 1913, Edwin Goldman, an associate of Ehrlich, demonstrated the very same dyes, when directly injected into the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), readily stained nervous tissue but not other tissues.  The term “blood-brain barrier” was coined, however, by Lewandowsky in 1898, after he and his colleagues had performed experiments to demonstrate that neurotoxic agents affected brain function only when directly injected into the brain but not when injected into the vascular system.  It took an additional 70 years until Reese and colleagues localized the barrier to the capillary endothelial cells within the brain by electron-microscopic studies. 
Endothelial cells in brain capillaries are the site of the BBB. The BBB in adults consists of a complex cellular system of a highly specialized basal membrane, a large number of pericytes embedded in the basal membrane and astrocytic end feet.  Whereas the endothelial cells form the barrier proper, the interaction with adjacent cells seems to be required for the development of the barrier.  The brain endothelial cells differ from endothelial cells from other organs in two important ways.  First, continuous tight junctions are present between brain endothelial cells.  These tight junctions prevent paracellular movement of molecules.  Second, there are no detectable transendothelial pathways such as intracellular vesicles.  These properties of brain endothelial cells provide a barrier between the blood and the brain.  Some of the key processes are depicted in Figure 11,1.
The continuous tight junctions that join the endothelial cells in the brain capillaries limit the diffusion of molecules across the BBB. 
The basement (basal) membrane provides structural support for the capillary and specific proteins present in the basement membrane have been proposed to be involved in the development of the BBB.
Astrocytic foot processes release specific factors and are necessary for the development of the BBB.  Astrocytic foot processes contain water channels (aquaporin-4) that allow water uptake and contribute to brain swelling.
Transport carriers for glucose and essential amino acids facilitate the movement of these solutes into the brain.  Since brain cells cannot synthesize these essential amino acids, it is taken up from the blood.
Secondary transport systems appear to cause efflux of small molecules and nonessential amino acids from the brain to the blood. 
Sodium ion transporters on the luminal membrane and Na,K-ATPase on the anti-luminal membrane account for movement of sodium from the blood to the brain.  The large number of mitochondrias present in the brain endothelial cells provide energy for the function of this Na,K-ATPase. 
The "enzymatic blood-brain-barrier": Metabolic processes within the brain capillary endothelial cells are important to blood-brain function and control the entry of neurotransmitters into the brain.
The tight junctions between endothelial cells are responsible for the barrier function.  Occludin was the first integral membrane protein found to be exclusively localized within the tight junctions.  However, mice carrying the null mutation in the occludin gene develop morphologically normal tight junctions, indicating that occluding is not essential for proper tight junction formation.  In contrast to occluding, claudins have been shown to be required for the formation of tight junctions.  The integral membrane proteins of tight junctions are linked to the cytoskeleton via zone occluding-1 (ZO-1), ZO-2 and ZO-3.  In addition, non-occludin adherens junctions are found intermingled with tight junctions.  In adherens junctions, the endothelial specific, integral membrane proteins VE-cadherins are found.  Furthermore, a family of proteins called junctional adhesion molecules (JAM), and recently discovered endothelial cell-selective adhesion molecules (ESAM), are localized in the tight junctions of the BBB.  Their precise function in BBB integrity remains to be determined.

All areas of the brain do not have a blood-brain barrier. The structures located at strategic positions in the midline of the ventricular system and lack the BBB are collectively referred to as circumventricular organs (CVOs).  In these non-barrier regions, the tight junctions between endothelial cells are discontinuous thus allowing entry of molecules.  Many of these areas participate in hormonal control. 
Substances with High Lipid Solubility May Move Across the BBB by Simple Diffusion. Diffusion is the major entry mechanism for most psychoactive drugs.  Figure 11,2 shows that the rate of entry of compounds that diffuse into the brain depends on their lipid solubility.  The lipid solubility is estimated by oil/water partition coefficient. 

Figure 11,5a depicts how the oil/water partition coefficient is calculated. Figure 11,5b shows the relationship between oil/water partition coefficient and brain penetration of selected molecules.
Water. Water readily enters the brain.  As a consequence of its high permeability, water moves freely into and out of the brain as the osmolarity of the plasma changes.  This phenomenon is clinically useful, since the intravenous administration of poorly permeable compounds such as mannitol will osmotically dehydrate the brain and reduce intracranial pressure.  This method is sometimes used in head trauma patients to reduce intracranial pressure. 

Gases. Gases such as CO2, O2 and volatile anesthetics diffuse rapidly into the brain.  As a consequence, the rate at which their concentration in the brain comes into equilibrium with plasma is limited primarily by the cerebral blood flow rate. 
Carrier-mediated transport enables molecules with low lipid solubility to traverse the blood-brain barrier. Glucose from blood enters the brain by a transport protein. Glucose is the primary energy substrate of the brain.  Glucose transport protein (GLUT-1) is highly enriched in brain capillary endothelial cells.  These transporters carry glucose molecules through the blood brain barrier.  Although rare, patients with Glut-1 deficiency (caused by genetic mutations) can have severe learning difficulties.  Low glucose sugar levels in the cerebrospinal, but not in the blood, will identify the condition. 

The essential amino acids cannot be synthesized by the brain and, therefore, must be supplied from protein breakdown and diet.   Phenylalanine, leucine, tyrosine, isoleucine, valine, tryptophan, methionine and histidine, which are essential amino acids, and also the precursor of dopamine, L-DOPA, enter the brain as rapidly as glucose.  These amino acids are transported into the brain by the leucine-preferring or the L-type transport proteins.  These compounds compete with each other for entry into the brain.  Therefore, an elevation of plasma level of one will inhibit uptake of the others.  This competition may be important for certain metabolic diseases such as phenylketonuria (PKU), where high levels of phenylalanine in plasma reduce brain uptake of other essential amino acids. 

Small neutral amino acids, such as alanine, glycine, proline and GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid), are markedly restricted in their entry into the brain.  These amino acids are non-essential amino acids and are transported by alanine-preferring or A-type transport protein.  The A-type transport protein is not present on the luminal surface of the blood brain barrier.  In contrast, these small neutral amino acids appear to be transported out of the brain across the blood-brain-barrier. 
P-glycoproteins are ATP-driven pumps which confer multi-drug resistance to cancer cells by pumping drugs out of the cells.  These proteins are expressed in brain endothelial cells that can limit the BBB permeability of hydrophobic compounds, such as cyclosporin A and vinblastine, by pumping them from the endothelial cells back to the blood.

Metabolic processes within the brain capillary endothelial cells are important to blood-brain function.  Most neurotransmitters present in the blood do not enter the brain because of their low lipid solubility and lack of specific transport carriers in the luminal membrane of the capillary endothelial cell (see Figure 11.1).  In contrast, L-DOPA, the precursor for dopamine, has an affinity for the L-type transporter. Therefore, it enters the brain more easily from the blood than would be predicted based on its lipid solubility.  Patients with Parkinson's disease are treated with L-DOPA rather than with dopamine because of this fact.  However, the penetration of L-DOPA into the brain is limited by the presence of enzymes L-DOPA decarboxylase and monoamine oxidase within the capillary endothelial cells.  This "enzymatic blood-brain barrier" limits passage of L-DOPA into the brain and explains the need for large doses of L-DOPA in the treatment of Parkinson's disease.  Therapy is currently enhanced by concurrent treatment with an inhibitor of L-DOPA decarboxylase.
Endothelial monoamine oxidase may also play a role in the inactivation of neurotransmitters released by neuronal activity.  Monoamines show very little uptake when presented from the luminal side.  The uptake systems for monoamines are present in the antiluminal surface of the brain capillary endothelial cells.  The brain endothelial capillary also contains a variety of other neurotransmitter-metabolizing enzymes such as cholinesterases, GABA transaminases, aminopeptidase and endopeptidases.  In addition, several drug and toxin metabolizing enzymes are also found in the brain capillaries. Thus the "enzymatic blood brain barrier" protects the brain not only from circulating neurotransmitters but also from many toxins.

Compromised BBB and Disease. BBB dysfunction can lead to neuronal damage and disturbed brain function.  Diseases such as encephalitis, multiple sclerosis (MS), stroke or tumors induce deterioration of the BBB with devastating influence on neuronal function.   These conditions decrease the production of the tight junction protein claudin.  Brain tumors cause complete breakdown of the BBB that leads to peritumoral edema.  Furthermore, tumor cells secrete specific factors [e.g. vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) that induces formation of new blood vessels (or angiogenesis)] which tend to be leaky.
Bypassing the BBB with drugs. A number of drugs of potential therapeutic value do not readily enter the brain because they have low lipid solubility and are not transported by specific carriers present in the BBB.  To overcome this limitation, schemes have been developed to enhance drug entry into the brain.  1) One way to bypass the BBB is to deliver the drug directly into the CSF.  This approach can be used to treat patients with meningitis or cancerous cells in the CSF. 2) Certain vasoactive compounds such as bradykinin and histamine, which do not alter BBB in normal people, can enhance permeability of BBB in pathological conditions.  These compounds can be used to deliver chemotherapeutic agents into the brain.  3) Drugs can be synthesized with high BBB permeability to improve entry into the brain. Most neuroactive drugs are effective because they dissolve in lipids and easily enter the brain.  For example, heroin and morphine are very similar in structure. However, heroin, which has two acetyl groups, is more lipid soluble.  This greater lipid solubility of heroin explains its more rapid onset of action.  Once within the brain, the acetyl group of heroin is removed enzymatically to produce morphine, which only slowly leaves the brain.  An understanding of the transport process is crucial to development of the next generation of drugs useful in treating brain diseases.
The brain is metabolically one of the most active of all organs in the body. The brain does not store excess energy and derives almost all of its energy needs from aerobic oxidation of glucose.  Therefore, it requires a continuous supply of glucose and oxygen to meet its energy requirements.  Most of the brain's energy consumption is used for active transport of ions to sustain and restore the membrane potentials discharged during the process of excitation and conduction.  When blood flow to the brain stops and absence of oxygen and blood occurs, a loss of consciousness results in 5-10 seconds.  If the blood flow is not resumed within several minutes, there is permanent brain damage.  It is well known that during crises, such as cardiac arrest, damage to the brain occurs earliest and is most decisive in determining the degree of recovery.  The absence of glucose is equally destructive, but the time course resulting in irreversible damage from hypoglycemia is longer because other substrates can be used.

Different regions of the brain have different energy requirements, which are related to the neuronal activity in these regions.  Measurement of amounts of glucose used per minute in different brain regions of a normal conscious rat and monkey demonstrates glucose utilization varies widely throughout the brain.  Moreover, the average value in the gray matter is approximately five times more than that in the white matter. 

The amount of blood flow is directly related to brain activity.  In a separate group of animals the amount of blood flow to brain areas was determined.  The results show that more blood flows to the area of the brain with high metabolic activity. 
Figure 11,10 shows there is an excellent correlation between the amount of glucose uses and local cerebral blood flow. 
Regulation of blood flow to a brain area is achieved by control of dilation of cerebral vessels.  The dilation of blood vessels is controlled by local factors such as nitric oxide (NO), PaCO2, PaO2 and pH.  High NO, high PaCO2, low PaCO2  and low pH, which are produced as a result of brain activity, tend to dilate the blood vessels and increase blood flow.  The rate of production of these chemicals is dependent of activity and rates of energy metabolism.  Therefore, blood flow to a brain region is related to neuronal activity in that region.
Glucose utilization and brain imaging. Glucose metabolism is the major energy source for the brain. Glucose from the blood enters the brain with help of Glut-1 transport protein.  Once inside a brain cell, it enters the glycolytic pathway, where it is converted to pyruvate and then metabolized through the Krebs cycle to generate ATP.  A fraction of ATP molecules is used to generate high energy phosphocreatine molecules.  Under conditions, aerobic metabolism of glucose is capable of providing the brain with sufficient energy from ATP and phosphocreatine to maintain normal function.  When brain failure occurs, there is a loss of phosphocreatine initially, followed by ATP depletion, which generally signals severe damage to the brain. 

Glucose deprivation can result in abnormal brain function.  Hypoglycemia, which can result from excessive insulin, is associated with changes in mental state.  These changes can be rapidly reversed by glucose administration.   In certain circumstances, such as during starvation, the brain can use “ketone bodies” in place of glucose as substrates.  Ketone bodies, acetoacetate and D-beta-hydroxybutyrate are formed from catabolism of fatty acids by the liver.  The ketone bodies are metabolized to generate acyl-CoA which enters the tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA) at a sufficient rate to meet the metabolic demand of the brain. 

Measurement of local glucose utilization.  The local energy metabolism is coupled to local functional activity.  Using an autoradiography analog of glucose, 2-deoxyglucose (2-DG), has been employed to measure glucose metabolism in experimental animals. 
Figure 11,4 illustrates the fundamental principle of radioactive deoxy glucose method for measuring the local cerebral glucose utilization.  Glucose utilization begins with phosphorylation of glucose by hexokinase.  The resulting glucose-6-phosphate is not retained in the tissues.  Instead, it is metabolized further to products such as CO2 and H2O that leave the tissue.  2-deoxyglucose is an analog of glucose and is transported across the blood-brain barrier by the glucose carrier system.  Inside brain cells, 2-deoxyglucose is phosphorylated by hexokinase to deoxyglucose-6-phosphate (DG-6-P) and cannot be further degraded into CO2 and H2O.  Instead it is trapped and accumulates in the tissue quantitatively for a reasonable length of time.  By putting a label on deoxyglucose (such as in [18F] fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose), it is possible to measure the rate of labeled deoxyglucose-6-phosphate formation.  The amount of 18FDG-6-phosphate can be directly determined using positron emission tomography (PET).  The 2-deoxyglucose method has been modified for human use with PET, with short lived positron emitting isotopes labeled to the 2-deoxyglucose.
Because of the coupling of metabolism to function, functional activation by specific stimuli tasks leads to regional increase in the glucose metabolism in corresponding cerebral structures.  Movement of fingers and hands increases metabolism in the respective brain regions.  In right handed volunteers, spontaneous speech increased metabolic activities in Broca's region.  Presentation of visual images increases glucose utilization in the primary visual cortex.

Functional MRI. A variant of MRI called functional MRI (fMRI) is based on the increase in the blood flow to specific brain regions that accompanies neuronal activity.  Increase in blood flow results in a local decrease in deoxyhemoglobin due to less oxygen extraction.   Deoxyhemoglobin is paramagnetic and serves as the source for the signal in fMRI.  Unlike PET, fMRI uses a signal intrinsic to the brain and has emerged as the technology of choice for probing brain function. 
Convulsive disorders are functional disturbances of brain activity and lead to marked changes in brain metabolism and cerebral blood flow.  The metabolic changes detected by PET can frequently complement electrophysiological recordings to locate epileptogenic foci.  This information helps neurosurgeons to surgically remove the epileptogenic focus.

Metabolic measurements using PET can be used to determine the size of infarction following ischemic stroke.  Brain tumors have high metabolic needs and are heavily vascularized.  PET or fMRI can be used to locate the tumor and evaluate effectiveness of a therapy.
Brain tissue is composed of neurons and other supporting cells, such as glia. Neurons in the brain are interconnected to make functional circuits.  If these connections are interrupted as a result of trauma, brain function is impaired.  Neurons are post-mitotic and therefore cannot divide to produce new neurons making neuronal loss as a result of trauma profoundly detrimental to normal brain function. At present, there is no effective therapy available to treat victims of brain trauma.

Traumatic brain injury (TBI) remains the leading cause of death and disability for those under the age of 44 years.  It has been estimated that nearly 2 million people suffer some degree of head injury every year in the United States alone.  Although the vast majority of these do not seek medical treatment, approximately 400,000 to 500,000 TBI victims require hospitalization.

In the US, the societal cost for TBI has been estimated at between $48 and $83.5 billion per year.  Only 12.5% of the annual financial expense is accounted for by direct cost (e.g. hospitalization, physician costs).  Since most TBI patients are young and in their peak productive years, the indirect costs (reduced or loss of productivity) represent the greatest loss to society.  The behavioral and psychological difficulties experienced by some patients are reported as being devastating not only to the patient but to the family and society as well.

Age: TBI most commonly occurs among infants and children, individuals 15 to 29 years of age, and the elderly (65+).
Sex: The male to female incidence of TBI has been estimated to be 2 to 1.
According to the most recent statistics from the National Institutes of Health (NIH), the major cause of TBI is vehicular accidents, violent acts, falls, and sports-related injury.  A head injury is usually a brief event occurring in less than 200 msec.  Traumatic brain damage is a result of (immediate mechanical damage of brain tissue, or primary injury) and indirect (delayed or secondary injury) processes.  The primary injury can be lessened through preventative measures, such as education of potential victims (e.g. don’t drink and drive), use of safety equipment (airbags, helmets) and enforcing laws for individual and public safety.  In contrast, secondary injuries are potentially amenable to therapeutic interventions because of their delayed onset and progression over minutes to months after the initial trauma.  Unfortunately, no effective treatments to abate secondary injuries are currently available
Brain trauma can be broadly divided into three categories.

Inertia injury. (e.g. sudden acceleration or deceleration) Inertial injuries are commonly associated with Diffuse Axonal Injury (DAI).  Axons are highly vulnerable to damage following closed head inertia injury.  Axonal swelling and disconnection can be seen in mild, moderate and sever TBI patients.  A subset of axons undergo axotomy as a result of primary injury, however, the majority undergo progressive changes leading to secondary axotomy.  TBI causes local mechanical and/or biochemical disruption of the axonal cytoskeleton. This causes axonal swelling due to continued delivery of organelles to the site of injury.  This continued swelling results in the disconnection of proximal axon bulb (referred to as retraction bulb) from its distal axonal segment.  Over time the distal axonal segment undergoes Wallerian degeneration, with the downstream deafferentation of the target site. 
Impact injury. (e.g. getting hit with a baseball bat) Impact injuries are often accompanied by the formation of hematomas.
Penetrating injury. (e.g. gun shots) Penetrating injuries are commonly associated with post-traumatic epilepsy.
The Glasgow coma scale (GCS) is a means of grading severity in TBI and is based on the patient's response to eye opening, best motor response and best verbal response. 

The Glasgow coma score is calculated from the scale and ranges from 3 to 15.  Head injured patients are classified as having mild TBI if their GCS score is 13 to 15; a moderate injury if the GCS is 9 to 12, and a severe injury if their GCS score is 3 to 8. 
Cognitive and behavioral disturbances are the primary contributors to disability in about two thirds of TBI patients.  In the other one third of the patients, motor deficits and other neurophysical sequelae contribute equally or more as compared to neuropsychological sequelae.  Neuropsychological deficits following TBI is related to the region of cerebral damage.  Diffuse cerebral damage to temporal, frontal, orbital and parietal regions result in cognitive impairments, involving memory, attention, information processing speed, intellectual functioning, language, executive functions and visuospatial ability.

Level of consciousness and orientation. Loss of consciousness is the clinical hallmark of head injury and reflects both the amount of brain damage and its distribution.  In its mildest degree, a concussion may be expressed by the subject’s awareness and memory without loss of consciousness (e.g. a football player's "dings").  "Coma" is applied to more profound impairments of consciousness.  An altered level of consciousness may occur in the acute stage following TBI as a result of a diffuse injury to the cerebral hemispheres or damage to the brainstem reticular formation.  Altered consciousness is often accompanied by confusion and disorientation.  Orientation is assessed by asking the patient his name, the date [day of week, month, year] and location [city, name of the hospital, floor number, room number, etc].
Memory and temporal lobe damage.  Memory is the most severely affected and most frequently reported symptom by TBI patients and their relatives.  Anterograde amnesia (impairment in ability to recall newly acquired information) as well as retrograde amnesia (impairment in ability to recall old memories) is observed.  Anterograde amnesia is frequently referred to as post-traumatic amnesia (PTA).  In patients with diffused TBI, PTA is thought to be a reliable index of the severity of injury.  PTA is defined as the approximate time post-trauma when the patient establishes memory of day-to-day ongoing events.  If PTA is less than 1 hour, the injury is assumed to be mild; if less than 24 hours, it is moderate; more than 24 hours but less than one month, the injury is severe; and when PTA is greater than 1 month, the injury is thought to be extremely severe.  The longer the duration of PTA, the more likely the patient has significant neurological disability, especially with regard to cognitive function.  Memory impairments may impact a patient's progress in a rehabilitation program, especially if the ability to learn new information is affected.  Damage to the temporal lobe, especially the hippocampus, is associated with memory impairments.  As will be discussed later, neurons in the hippocampus express high levels of glutamate receptors and often die as a result of TBI.

Attention, concentration, executive functions, behavioral disturbance and frontal lobe damage. The frontal lobe comprises a vast expansion of cortex and white matter anterior to the central sulcus.  Humans have a tremendous increase in volume of the prefrontal region compared with other higher primates.  Damage to the frontal lobe can compromise complex decision-making, foresight and social conduct. Attention and concentration difficulties are the second most frequently reported complaint of TBI patients with frontal lobe injuries.  Patients who have mild injury usually recover from attention deficits within three months, in contrast to those with severe injuries, who may have more permanent deficits.  Slowing of cognitive function and distractibility are also common findings.  Mild TBI patients, although they perform well on standard ability tests, report that cognitive tasks demand more effort than prior to the injury.  Attention and concentration may be informally evaluated during the course of the patient examination.  Patients may have difficulty attending to the interview and may be easily distracted by external stimuli such as hallway activity.  Speed of cognitive processing may also be grossly assessed by noting the patient's response time to questions or commands.

Executive functions are a type of brain function that motivates self initiated behavior and govern its appropriateness.  Executive functions are needed for problem solving, planning and decision-making and damage to prefrontal cortex can cause deficits in these functions.   Furthermore, verbal fluency, hypothesis generation, use of feedback and shift of strategies are also impaired.

Behavioral disturbances are a common manifestation after severe brain injury, with personality change, slowness, irritability, bad temper, fatigue, rapid mood change and depression.  The orbital frontal regions have been implicated in impulsivity, anger control, aggressiveness, sexual acting out and social judgment.  Damage to orbital frontal region can cause release of previously inhibited behaviors and impair the ability to interpret social signals.

Visual disturbances and occipital lobe damage.  The occipital lobes are the posterior part of hemispheres, and can be divided into the primary visual cortex and visual association cortices.  Damage to these areas will alter visual perception.

Neglect and parietal lobe damage.  Neglect refers to a phenomenon in which a patient fails to attend to a portion of extrapersonal or intrapersonal space.  In the visual modality, in which neglect is most often manifested, the patient may fail to attend to the left hemispace, ignoring objects, persons, and movements that occur in the left side.  Such a presentation is commonly caused by lesion in the right parietal and occipitoparietal region.  Severe neglect often occurs in the acute stage of brain injury, often in the first few days or weeks after the onset of brain damage.  Several months after the onset of the lesion, most patients have recovered substantially, although subtle attentional deficits for the left-sided stimuli may still persist. Focal injury to the dominant parietal lobe may result in impairment of mathematical skills.  Deficits may limit the patient in his ability to manage finances or participate in basic community activities, such as shopping.  Calculation skills can be easily assessed by having the patient perform serial subtraction of sevens from one hundred, although more complex multiplication and division problems can also be administered. However, one must take pre-morbid educational history into account when interpreting the results of these tests.

Speech and language.  Language skills are commonly impaired following TBI that involve the dominant hemisphere.  Difficulty with spoken and written language or problems with language processing can occur.  Language deficits are usually accompanied by other cognitive impairments.  The most common feature of traumatic aphasia is anomia, which is characterized by difficulty in naming, word-finding deficits, and paraphasic errors.  Broca's aphasia is more common in a penetrating-type injury due to a lesion of the dominant frontal lobe. Wernicke's aphasia occurs less frequently following TBI and is caused by focal injury to the dominant temporal lobe.  Higher language skills such as complex auditory processing, spelling, sentence construction, synonyms, antonyms, and abstract language skills, such as picture description, can be impaired. 

Depression.  Depression occurs frequently after brain injury.  TBI patients who experience depression may report worry, hopelessness, suicidal thoughts, and social withdrawal.  It is likely that there are direct and indirect factors related to the development of depression in brain-injured persons.  Brain damage can produce direct neurophysiological and neurochemical changes that may induce depressive symptomatology.  The secondary reaction of the patient to the implications of newly acquired disabilities certainly is a frequent and understandable source of depression.

Cranial nerve damage.  TBI can damage one or more of the cranial nerves resulting in specific deficits. Olfactory dysfunction occurs in approximately 7% of patients with TBI.  This figure approaches 20% in TBI patients who have suffered from loss of consciousness.  Furthermore, the olfactory nerve is the most commonly affected cranial nerve in mild TBI.  Impairment in detection of smell is usually caused by frontal or occipital blows causing direct injury to the olfactory pathways.  Olfactory dysfunction can lead to functional impairment, including diminished pleasure and potential safety problems due to inability to detect dangerous smells such as gas. 
Post-traumatic epilepsy.  Epileptic seizures occur in 2.5 to 5% of patients with traumatic brain injury.  In 1930, Foerester and Penfield induced seizure activity by electrical stimulation of areas surrounding a gunshot lesion of cerebral cortex.  These findings suggested the presence of an epileptic zone or penumbra surrounding the site of injury.  Furthermore, retraction of dura that had become adherent to the damaged cortex also triggered seizures.  This hypothesis is supported by clinical findings that head injuries associated with dural penetration are associated with the highest incidence of post-traumatic epilepsy (27 to 43%).  An intriguing hypothesis of post- traumatic epilepsy has been the implication of blood breakdown products in the cellular events that lead to epileptogenesis.  An important role for iron deposition has been supported by experimental studies in animals.  Another possibility is that TBI can create imbalances between neuronal excitation and inhibition that can lead to post-traumatic epileptogenesis. 

TBI is a risk factor for Alzheimer’s disease.  Epidemiological studies have suggested that head injury may be a risk factor for Alzheimer’s disease.  Histopathological examination of brains from patients who died as a consequence of head trauma has shown amyloid beta (Ab) deposition.  It is also interesting to note that demential pugilistica (punch-drunk syndrome) is also associated with memory loss and diffuse Ab deposition.  Carriers of the apolipoprotein E4 (apoE4) allele, which may play a direct role in Ab deposition in vivo, have been shown to be an increase risk factor for developing Alzheimer’s disease.  Head-injured patients with apoE4 are more than twice as likely as those without apoE4 to have an unfavorable outcome.
As indicate above, traumatic injury to the central nervous system is a progressive disorder with two distinct components.  The initial, immediate biomechanical damage (referred to as primary injury) is defined as structural damage to neurons, their supporting cells and vasculature.  Secondary injury consists of progressive cellular damage resulting from degradative biochemical processes that occur as a response to the primary injury.  The recognition of secondary injury as a progressive biochemical disorder implies that a window of time exists in which effective pharmacotherapy could be administered.
Excitatory amino acid receptors.  Levels of extracellular excitatory amino acids (e.g. glutamate and aspartate) are increased following brain trauma.  These neurotransmitters activate specific cell surface receptors causing influx of sodium and calcium ions into the cytosol.  Glutamate is the most abundant excitatory neurotransmitter in the central nervous system.  Binding of glutamate to NMDA receptors allows influx of sodium and calcium ions into neurons.  Influx of sodium leads to neuronal swelling and increase intracellular calcium causes cell death.  Antagonists for NMDA and non-NMDA receptors have been shown to be neuroprotective in experimental TBI. Clinical trials using excitatory amino acid blockers, however, have shown discouraging results and unwanted side effects, namely psychotropic problems. 

Calcium ions.  Among ions, calcium has drawn the most attention.  This ion has been implicated in cerebral edema, vasospasm and cell death following injury to the CNS.  Increases in intracellular calcium can occur via multiple pathways including, NMDA receptors, calcium channels and release of calcium from intracellular stores.  Sustained elevations of intracellular calcium are toxic.  The molecular events triggered by elevated calcium include activation of proteases, lipases, generation of free radicals and impairment of mitochondrial function leading to energy failure. 

Proteolytic mechanisms of cell death.  The calpain family of proteases are activated by elevated intracellular calcium.  Calpains proteolyze many cellular proteins including cytoskeletal proteins, excitatory amino acid receptors, cell adhesion molecules and enzymes.  Breakdown of these proteins causes irreversible structural and functional alterations leading to cellular necrosis.  Another family of proteases, the caspases, also cause cell death following CNS injury.  Caspases are involved in neuronal apoptosis.  Apoptosis differs from necrosis in that cell lysis does not occur and is a relatively slower process of cell death.

Phospholipases. Elevated intracellular calcium phospholipases, enzymes that degrade membrane lipids, increase following TBI.  Breakdown of membrane lipids (notably by phospholipase A2) result in loss of cellular integrity, ionic imbalance and cell death. 

Free radicals.  Free radicals are highly reactive molecules that damage neuronal, glial and vascular membrane phospholipids and cause oxidation of cellular proteins and nucleic acids.  The brain appears to be particularly vulnerable to such oxidative injury.  It contains relatively high concentrations of readily peroxidizable fatty acids.  Furthermore, the brain is poorly supplied with protective antioxidant enzymes and endogenous antioxidant compounds.  Free radicals cause widespread cellular and vascular damage.  Potential sources of oxygen free radicals within the injured brain include mitochondrial leakage, arachidonic acid metabolism, xanthine oxidase pathway and catecholamine oxidation.  Several drugs have been tested for their ability to protect free radical-mediated damage.  Superoxide dismutase (SOD) and its polyethylene glycol-conjugate (PEG-SOD), which has a longer biological half life, has been shown to be neuroprotective in experimental models.  However, a multi-center study did not show a significantly improved outcome in patients who received PEG-SOD compared to those who received placebo. 

Secondary Injury. The pathology of TBI reflects the initial insult, resulting from mechanical damage to neural and vascular structures (the primary injury), and the evolution of a cascade of secondary events that impair function, damage structures, and promote further cell death collectively referred to as secondary injury. Secondary injury encompasses a number of pathological processes that can continue to evolve over a period of days, weeks or even months, after the primary insult.  For example, neurons in the CNS that are synaptically connected not only release neurotransmitters but also neurotrophic factors (e.g. BDNF) that are critical for their survival.  Damage to the axon of a neuron as a result of primary injury leads to its degeneration disconnection from the post-synaptic neuron.  This results in reduced availability of neurotrophic factors leading to eventual degeneration (via apoptosis or programmed cell death) of the post-synaptic neuron.  Since secondary injuries evolve over time after the primary injury, they may provide a window of opportunity for therapeutic intervention.
Traumatic injury to the spinal cord causes loss of sensory and motor function distal to the point of injury.  There are approximately 400,000 patients with SCI in the US.  The leading causes of SCI are motor vehicle accidents, violent acts and sports-related injuries, especially diving accidents.  The majority of the victims are typically between the ages of 16 and 25 years. 
Pathophysiology of SCI. The pathophysiology of SCI can be divided into three phases: Primary, secondary and chronic processes.  Primary injury results mainly from mechanical damage, while secondary process involves apoptotic cell death, release of growth inhibitory molecules and glial scar formation.  Chronic pain syndrome develops usually within several months to years following injury.  This pain profoundly affects the quality of life.

Targets for Intervention. The most immediate intervention in SCI treatment is patient stabilization and decompression of the vertebral columns to prevent further trauma.  An acute treatment recommended by the National Acute Spinal Cord Injury Study is administration of a high dose of methylprednisolone (MP), a steroid, within eight hours of injury.  MP is thought to decrease edema, inflammatory response and/or free radical production.  Many axons are demyelinated as result of secondary injury.  Voltage-gated potassium channel blocker 4-aminopyridine (4-AP) looks extremely promising in clinical trials.  Application of 4-AP blocks potassium channels and partially restores action potential conduction properties. 
Molecular and genetic strategies may represent new avenues for future clinical trials.  The following processes have to succeed for recovery of neuronal functions following brain trauma.

